<!DOCTYPE tei.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [
      <!ENTITY teieng system 'teien.wsd' NDATA wsd>
      <!ENTITY teigrc system 'teigreek.wsd' NDATA wsd>
      <!ENTITY teilat system 'teila.wsd' NDATA wsd>
      <!ENTITY teifra system 'teifra.wsd' NDATA wsd>
      <!ENTITY teiesp system 'teiesp.wsd' NDATA wsd>
      <!ENTITY % symbols.ent system 'symbols.ent'> %symbols.ent;
]>
<tei.2>
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>
	The support of internal text critical evidence for the
	Alexandrian and Byzantine text types in Luke
      </title>
      <author><name> Vincent Broman </></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition>
	Second draft, substantially revised from the
	text first distributed electronically,
	<date>11 May 1996</>
      </edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <extent>Approximately 150k bytes uncompressed</>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>
	TC: a Journal of Biblical Textual Criticism
      </publisher>
      <pubPlace>The Global Internet</pubPlace>
      <date>1996</date>
      <availability>
	<p>Copyright 1995 Vincent Broman
	<p>Permission granted to make verbatim (unaltered) copies
	for any noncommercial purpose.
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
    <p>The electronic text is the original form, not a transcription.
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <refsDecl>
      <p>References are according to the TC Guidelines.
    </refsDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <creation>
      Originally a plain ASCII text available on the Internet,
      then revised and marked up with TEI Lite for potential publication.
    </creation>
    <langUsage>
      <language id=eng wsd=teieng> Modern American English </language>
      <language id=grc wsd=teigrc> Koine Greek, TLG BETA coding </language>
      <language id=lat wsd=teilat> Latin </language>
      <language id=fra wsd=teifra> Modern French </language>
      <language id=esp wsd=teiesp> Modern Spanish </language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date>9 mar 1996</><respStmt><name>VPB</><resp>ed.</></>
      <item>TEI markup</>
    </change>
    <change>
      <date>11 May 1996</><respStmt><name>VPB</><resp>ed.</></>
      <item>SGML parsing, corrections, LaTeX typesetting</>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<text lang=eng>
<front>
  <titlePage>
    <docTitle>
      <titlePart type=main>
	The support of internal text critical evidence for the
	Alexandrian and Byzantine text types in Luke
      </titlePart>
    </docTitle>
    <docAuthor> Vincent Broman </>
    <docDate> 11 May 1996 </>
  </titlePage>

  <div type=abstract>
    <head> Abstract </>
    <p> This article evaluates, on the basis of Hort's
    <term>internal evidence of groups</>,
    the relative weight of authority that ought to be assigned to manuscripts
    of the Byzantine and Alexandrian text types when they are compared
    for the purpose of reconstructing the original text of Luke.
    An averaged text representing each text type is constructed
    in chapters 8-10 and 16-18 of Luke from the agreement of three of the four
    manuscripts &aleph; B L 892 and three of the four manuscripts A W Y &Pi;.
    All of the 179 differences between these averaged texts are individually
    listed and discussed,
    weighing the internal evidence for each reading being original
    or secondary. The <term lang=lat>lectio brevior</>
    canon of criticism was not used.
    The weight of internal evidence favored the Alexandrian text
    in 47 locations,
    the Byzantine text in 69 locations, and in the remaining 63 locations
    the evidence was balanced, indiscernible, or favorable to a third reading.
    The commonly held view that the Alexandrian witnesses are superior
    in textual character to the Byzantines was not confirmed.
  </div>
</front>

<body>

<div type=section><head> Background </>

<p> 
Most witnesses to the text of the New Testament, whether manuscripts, versions,
or citations, can be classified into broad groups called text types.
The members of a text type have texts that agree closely enough
that their similarity in readings can probably be attributed to descent
by copying or mixture from some common ancestor or ancestors,
although similarities
in editorial policy among the copyists involved may also play some role.
Text types are not so closely knit as text families,
for which a family archetype is either extant or reconstructible.

<p>
The earliest attested text type in most of the NT is called
<soCalled rend=quoted>Western</>
(or Delta or D) because some of the prominent witnesses to it are found
in the western Roman empire.  Not everyone agrees that the
<soCalled rend=quoted>Western</>
witnesses are unified enough to be called a text type.
Next oldest are the witnesses to the text type associated with Egypt,
called Alexandrian (or Beta).  Hort distinguished the earliest
Alexandrian witnesses available to him, &aleph;, B, and Origen, from the later
witnesses by giving them the value-laden name of
<soCalled rend=quoted>Neutral</> text type.
(Or more precisely, the label <soCalled rend=quoted>Neutral</>
describes a hypothetical text thought to lie behind these witnesses.)
I follow Colwell in regarding the Neutrals and Alexandrians all as
one broad stream stretching from p75 down to 1241.
The great majority of Greek witnesses from the ninth century on,
and some back to the fourth century, belong to the Byzantine
(or Syrian or Antiochian or Alpha or Koine) text type.  Within this
text type several chronological layers and numerous families and subgroups
have been delineated.  A Caesarean (or Gamma) text type, named for its
similarity to the Gospel quotations of Origen and Eusebius in Caesarea,
has been detected in Mark, but its outlines are shadowy and dubitable.

<p>
About 100 years ago, Hort led the movement that dethroned the Textus Receptus,
the most visible representative of the Syrian or Byzantine text type, and
crowned in its stead Vaticanus and the other Neutral witnesses to the NT text.
Since then, the received opinion has been that NT manuscripts of the
Byzantine text type are of little or no value in recovering the original
text of the NT.  This opinion persists today, even though Hort's
genealogical theory explaining the origin of the Byzantines as a
secondary development is no longer widely accepted.
In particular, his Syrian text is not the
result of an authoritatively promulgated recension.
Nearly all modern editions of the Greek New Testament closely resemble
the edition of Westcott-Hort.  This solidarity is attributable
to several factors, but prominent among those factors is Hort's claim
that <term>internal evidence of groups</> clearly favors Alexandrian witnesses
over other kinds of witnesses, especially the Syrian or Byzantine witnesses.
This claim is still very widely accepted and repeated.

<p>
The authority of "good manuscripts" rests partly on considerations
of age and provenance, but also substantially on our judgement
based on internal evidence about the quality of the text in that manuscript.
The <term>internal evidence of readings</> includes a consideration of intrinsic
probabilities, i.e. which reading is more likely to be what the original
author would write, as well as transcriptional probabilities, i.e. which
reading seems to arise from known causes of transcriptional corruption.
The <term>internal evidence of documents</> evaluates whether a document
predominantly exhibits readings favored or not favored by internal
evidence of readings, wherever such evidence is clearly discernible.
Hort's <term>internal evidence of groups</> evaluates the internal evidence of
readings for or against the variants read in common by a group of witnesses,
e.g., a group of witnesses that belong to a single text family or type.

<p>
Gordon Fee wrote an article [Fee79] patiently refuting the
view of Pickering, Hodges, et al, that the Byzantine text was the
Majority text of every century.  Fee (echoing others) suggested that
long experience with comparing manuscripts supported the feeling
that the Byzantines are overwhelmingly opposed by considerations
of internal evidence.  He suggested: just open up Tischendorf and count!
So, I accepted his challenge, hoping to experience some of that weight
of accumulated examples by doing such an evaluation myself.

<p>
Since the results turned out rather different from
many would have expected,
readers should work through the mass of concrete particulars presented herein.
This will allow the weight of evidence to erase uncritical prejudices
and hearsay opinions, in favor of empirically defensible conclusions.
By exposing this body of evidence to public, critical examination,
I hope that errors due to my biases and blindspots can be overcome.

</div>
<div type=section><head> Approach </>

<p>
I want to methodically study the differences between the Alexandrian
and Byzantine text types, in as objective a fashion as possible,
in order to evaluate their collective authority as text types.

<p>
The process of weighing internal text critical evidence is unavoidably
subjective in many respects, but we can still demand at least that the body
of readings to be compared be objectively determined.  Also, we desire that
the set of textual differences to be examined be chosen in such a way that
conclusions about text types can be drawn, and so that text-type issues can be
disentangled from related issues such as the age of the manuscripts involved,
the number and distribution of extant witnesses and their lacunae,
and the effects of translation seen in the versional witnesses.

<p>
First, then, we must take our evidence from the readings of manuscripts,
not the texts of editions.  Even though NA26 is heavily Alexandrian
and the Stephanus 1550 TR is quite Byzantine, we should not compare
these two editions for this study just for convenience sake, because the
text of NA26 depends on imponderable factors of editorial judgement,
and the TR does not represent well the Byzantine tradition of any century
before the sixteenth.  Representative coverage of the manuscript evidence
from both the Alexandrian and Byzantine text types is not available in the
Nestle-Aland apparatus, but it is available for the book of Luke
in the apparatus of the International Greek New Testament Project [IGNTP].

<p>
Since we want to draw general conclusions about the value of whole
groups of manuscripts, it may not be advisable to select one champion
from each text type camp for a bout of single combat, because
the results could depend on idiosyncracies of those single manuscripts
and not generalize well to judgements about the whole tribe.
This will be illustrated later in this paper by a concrete example.
Vaticanus (B) and Petropolitanus (&Pi;) were collated against each other
as representatives of the Alexandrian and Byzantine text types,
and the variants found were evaluated
to see how well they represent the difference between text types.
It turns out, not well, as the details reported below suggest.

<p>
In order to avoid idiosyncrasies of individual MSS,
some kind of averaged text must be
constructed from more representative manuscripts than one.
And if several manuscripts are referred to in constructing each averaged
text, we must refer consistently to the same manuscripts
throughout the whole study.  This means either that nonfragmentary
manuscripts must be chosen, or else that the sections of text reconstructed
be confined to those verses where all witnesses are extant.  Because of the
small amount of common text which appears in any two fragmentary witnesses,
I chose to work with generally nonfragmentary Greek manuscripts.

<p>
If we were to compare the value of &aleph; and B, say, against U and 045,
one might well complain that we are not comparing text type against
text type so much as we are comparing fourth century witnesses against
ninth century witnesses.
Accordingly, the set of witnesses chosen to represent each text type should be
roughly equal in average age, to isolate the effect of age from the
effect of text type.

<p>
When averaging together any three manuscripts, whether related or not,
a 2/3 majority is very easy to muster, so I decided to choose four
manuscripts to represent each text type and require a 3/4 majority vote
to determine how each averaged text would read.  Wherever this 3/4
majority cannot be mustered, the averaged text has a lacuna.

<p>
To represent the Alexandrians, &aleph;, B, and L are obvious choices, because they
are the only nonfragmentary uncials of that text type in Luke.
Wisse classifies C as <q>mixed</q> not <q>group B</q> in Luke.
Among the Alexandrian miniscules, all but 892 and 1241 were
either fragmentary or exhibited block mixture.  After a quick test
of frequency of defections, 892 was chosen as the more loyal of these two.
The symbol gB stands for the 3/4 consensus of (the first hand readings of)
&aleph;&plus;B&plus;L&plus;892 in this study.

<p>
To represent the Byzantines in Luke, A and W are the obvious starting points.
The text of W shows block mixture, with Luke 1:1-8:10 being non-Byzantine.
Because of this, chapters 1-7 were excluded from consideration
and the one unit of variation in 8:1-10 for which the reading of W
was critical to the voting was omitted from the study.  There may
be another block mixture boundary somewhere near chapter 18 or 19 in W,
but it is less distinctive or significant.  This complicating factor of
block mixture did not disqualify W from use in this study,
because we needed an <emph>early</> Byzantine MS, and the next-best candidate
available was the 7th century uncial 0211.  A wide range of choices
was available for the other Byzantine manuscripts to be chosen.
Silva Lake showed, in Mark at least, that the common parent
of the closely related A and &Pi; was probably more similar to &Pi; than A.
Because of this result, &Pi; was chosen for the third representative.
I thought a witness which was related to A and &Pi;, but not descended
from A or &Pi; would make the averaged text more like a real archetype,
so I chose Y from what Wisse in [Wis] calls the &Pi;-b group of manuscripts.
Y has a lacuna in 16:1-4, so one variant in those verses for which
Y was critical to the voting was also omitted from the study.
The symbol gA stands for the 3/4 consensus of (the first hand readings of)
A&plus;W&plus;Y&plus;&Pi; in this study.

<p>
The IGNTP Luke [IGNTP] apparatus was carefully searched throughout
chapters 8-10 and 16-18 for all variants where
at least three of the four Alexandrians chosen differed from at
least three of the four Byzantines.  This step should be repeatable
with no great difficulty by anyone checking these results, except
that deciding how much to include in one unit of variation occasionally
required use of judgement.  Several readings first written up
separately were later joined together when analysis showed they
were closely coupled.

</div>
<div type=section><head> Internal Evidences Used </>

<p>
The types of internal evidences I examined are, with one major exception,
essentially those named in the introduction to Metzger's commentary [Met].
These are:
<list type=bulleted>
<item> parablepsis or hom, i.e. scribal leaps forward or backward,</>
<item> scribal omission or alteration of material which seemed superfluous,
harsh, impious, or contradicted liturgical or ascetic usages,</>
<item> devotional expansion by scribes of references to deity or holy things,
and filling out of confusing ellipses,</>
<item> scribal harmonization of the text to parallels,</>
<item> scribal harmonization of the text to the immediate context,</>
<item> scribal substitution of more common expressions for rare expressions,
and improved, refined, Attic usage for unrefined Koine usage,</>
<item> the author's known style, usage, and preferred vocabulary,</>
<item> harmony with the authorial intentions known by other means, and</>
<item> style reflecting the Aramaic background of Jesus' teaching and the
use of the Septuagint in citations and allusions.
</list>
I did not find any use for Metzger's rule mentioning the priority of Mark
among the Gospels, granting that the hypothesis may be useful for
inferring the intentions of the author.

<p>
I explicitly rejected from Metzger's list of canons of criticism
the one often referred to as <term lang=lat>lectio brevior</>,
that is, the preference for shorter readings over longer readings.
Along with it I reject similar
generalizations which are simply hypothetical rationales for this canon,
e.g. the claim that scribes always tended to expand and fill out the text
by adding pronouns, conjunctions, and expletives.

<p>
Royce in [Roy95] presents a good discussion of this <q>shorter reading</q>
canon and finds it vaguely or inconsistently defined and applied.
Various exceptions to the shorter reading rule have been seen
as necessary, such as for instances of parablepsis or for the deletion of
displeasing readings, but in particular an exception is often prescribed for
the loss of inessential short words such as pronouns and articles.
This one exception happens to cover a large subset of the variations
between text types we examine in this paper.

<p>
Royce summarizes three studies by Colwell [Col], Hood [Hoo], and
himself [Roy81] on the scribal habits of the copyists of the early NT papyri.
These studies examine the text of pre-fourth-century NT papyri
and critically analyze the singular readings to determine what
kind of errors the copyists of those manuscripts tended to make.
All these studies found that deletions of text occurred
substantially more often than additions of text.
This means that the oft-heard generalizations to the effect that
scribes predominantly tended to expand the text simply do
not apply to the early period of NT textual transmission.
While these empirical results might well justify adopting a canon
favoring the longer reading when dealing with NT texts of this early
period, I do not revolutionize to that extent in this study.

</div>
<div type=section><head> Results predicted by theories like those of Hort </>

<p>
Since this study is an attempt to explicitly and formally test
certain widespread opinions about New Testament text types,
it is appropriate to review what current wisdom says
about the quality of Alexandrian and Byzantine witnesses to the NT text.

<p>
Westcott and Hort on p. 116 of [] wrote about distinctively Syrian readings:
<q>Often either the transcriptional or the intrinsic evidence
is neutral or divided, and occasionally the two kinds of evidence
appear to be in conflict.  But there are, we believe,
no instances where both are clearly in favor of the Syrian reading,
and innumerable where both are clearly adverse to it.</q>

<p>
And on p. 192, writing about &aleph;, B, C, D, L, and 33 as primary documents,
Westcott and Hort say:
<q>... all groups containing none of these primary documents are
found so habitually to support the obviously wrong variants
where internal evidence is tolerably clear,
that they must lie under the strongest suspicion in doubtful variations.</q>

<p>
Fee on p411 of [Fee79] said, after discussing an example of a harder reading:
<q>This example can be multiplied a thousand times over; and in the vast
majority of cases the 'easier' reading (= the corruption) is that
of the majority text.</q>

<p>
While Aland in [Ala] does not make a clear, explicit statement about
the lack of authority he sees in the Byzantine witnesses, he
makes perfectly clear from his examples of text criticism in
action that Byzantine witnesses carry no weight in his estimation.
This is also evident from the fourteen units of variation cited in the
section on readings below
where the Byzantine reading is favored by internal evidence
over the Alexandrian reading, but the Nestle-Aland 26th edition
does not even mention
the reading in the apparatus, much less place it in the text.

<p>
From the cited comments, I would suppose that Hort, Aland, Fee,
and most contemporary text critics would predict that among the textual
variants examined in this paper, many more, perhaps twice as
many more, would exhibit internal evidence favorable to the
Alexandrian text type as would appear favorable to the Byzantine text type.

</div>
<div type=section>
<head> Outline and format of data in the section on readings </>

<p>
Each of the 179 units of variation is listed separately below,
each variant location labeled by a chapter number, a verse number,
and a location number between 1 and 179.  After this heading
comes the list of alternative readings followed by the summary verdict
and the discussion.
The differing readings in each text location are quoted
with sufficient context to identify the unit of variation unambiguously.
The gA reading is always listed first, followed by the gB reading second,
followed by the other alternative readings, if any.
The identifying sigla for the essential witnesses supporting each reading
appear after the text of the reading.  The gA reading is usually that
of the TR, but if not, another reading is labeled with "TR".
The gB reading is usually that of NA26, but if not, another reading
is labeled as "NA26".  If a unit of variation is not documented
by any apparatus entry in NA26, then it is noted that
<q rend=quoted>the variant is unmentioned in NA26.</q>

<p>
The summary verdict follows the keyword "Preference: ",
and is encoded as
<list type=gloss>
<label>gA</><item> internal evidence definitely favoring A&plus;W&plus;Y&plus;&Pi;</>
<label>gA?</><item> internal evidence slightly favoring A&plus;W&plus;Y&plus;&Pi;</>
<label>none</><item> no preference, balanced preference,
                     or preferring a third reading</>
<label>gB?</><item> internal evidence slightly favoring &aleph;&plus;B&plus;L&plus;892</>
<label>gB</><item> internal evidence definitely favoring &aleph;&plus;B&plus;L&plus;892</>
</list>

<p>
The discussion lists the parallel passages considered as
harmonization opportunities, mentions the considerations which
make one or the other reading appear primary or secondary,
and suggests the most likely explanation of the facts observed.
The sources referred to by the author's name are those in the
bibliography below.  The difference between "definitely" and
"slightly" is intended to be at least suggestive, even though
no clear empirical definition of these terms was ever attempted.

</div>
<div type=section><head> Section on readings with discussion </>

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:09, variant number 1 </head>
<label lang=grc> LEGONTES TIS </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> TIS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 13:9-10 and Mark 4:9-10, which caused no synoptic harmonization.
<p>The extra <q lang=grc>LEGONTES</q> after <q lang=grc>EPHRWTWN</q>
is superfluous, a semitism/LXXism, and so is Lukan.
(This reading is also "distinctively Syrian", by the way.)

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:12, variant number 2 </head>
<label lang=grc> AKOUONTES </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AKOUSANTES </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Mark 4:15 and Mark 13:19, where the wording is only loosely similar
to that in Luke, so that synoptic harmonization is not a strong likelihood.
How about LXX Isaiah??  Preference divided??
<p>
The verse 10 quote of Isaiah reads <q lang=grc>AKOUONTES</q>,
verse 12 has <q lang=grc>PISTEUANTES</q>,
verse 14 has <q lang=grc>AKOUSANTES</q> in the same context,
and verse 15 has <q lang=grc>AKOUSANTES</q>.
The tense of gA might be a harmonization to verse 10,
and gB might be harmonizing to verses 14 and 15.
The context before <q lang=grc>EITA</q> seems to demand an aorist participle.
Succeeding instances of <q lang=grc>AKOUSANTES</q> in fam. &Pi;, fam. 1675,
and other scattered MSS are changed to present tense.
Several singular readings harmonize to Matt, Mark, Isaiah.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:16, variant number 3 </head>
<label lang=grc> LUXNIAS EPITIQHSIN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> LUXNIAS TIQHSIN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> LUXNIAS </>
  <item> 983 1241 2643 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Mark 4:21 <q lang=grc>EPI THN LUXNIAN EPITEQH</q>
(gB <q lang=grc>TEQH</q>).
<p>Cf. Matt 5:15 <q lang=grc>LUXNIAN</q> with verb implied.
<p><q lang=grc> TIQHSIN</q> may be a harmonization to prior context.
The gA compound verb is a Lukan preference.
The extra <q lang=grc>EPI</q> may have seemed superfluous to a copyist.
After the preceding <q lang=grc>UPOKATW KLINHS TIQHSIN</q>,
Luke would likely repeat the verb with either a synonym or,
at least, a variation in form.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:17, variant number 4 </head>
<label lang=grc> O OU GNWSQHSETAI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> O OU MH GNWSQH </>
  <item> &aleph; B Lc (L* omit <q lang=grc>MH</>) 892 </>
<label lang=grc> ALLA INA GNWSQH </>
  <item> D d </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Mark 4:22-23 <q lang=grc>FANERWQH</q>, the reading of D parallel
only in the addition of <q lang=grc>INA</q>.
<p>Cf. Matt 10:26 where the verb matches gA.
<p>Cf. Luke 12:2 where the verb matches gA, also.
<p>Synoptic harmonization is not highly likely: the wording is
a very loose paraphrase.
<!-- gA is fut pass ind.  gB is aor pass subj. -->
The tense of gA matches the preceding <q lang=grc>GENHSETAI</q>.
That of gB matches the following <q lang=grc>ELQH</q>.
Note that the form of <q lang=grc>ELQH</q> nearby is firm,
there is no urge to change it in the MSS.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:20, variant number 5 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI APHGGELH </>
  <item> A (Y -<q lang=grc>ELEI</>) &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> APHGGELH DE </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 </>
<label lang=grc> APHGGELLH DE </>
  <item> L p75 </>
<label lang=grc> APHGGEILAN DE </>
  <item> X 213 Cs Cb </>
<label lang=grc> KAI APHGGELQH </>
  <item> W 372 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 12:47 <q lang=grc>EIPE</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 3:32 which presents no significant parallel.
No synoptic harmonization to be seen.
An abundance of <q lang=grc>KAI</q> is more Koine in style,
<q lang=grc>DE</q> Attic, according to Bauer p391.
This suggests that gA is sooner attributable to the less lettered
Evangelist than to an Atticistic copyist.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:20, variant number 6 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTW LEGONTWN </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AUTW OTI </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AUTW </>
  <item> B W	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> AUTW IDOU </>
  <item> Cs Cb gat </>
<label lang=grc> AUTW LEGONTWN OTI </>
  <item> 4 1424 pc Sh </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 12:47 <q lang=grc>EIPE DE TIS AUTW</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 3:32 <q lang=grc>EIPON DE AUTW</q>, to which the Coptic
here is parallel, no other harmonization being detectable.
<p>
Pleonastic <q lang=grc>LEGWN</q> like the gA reading
is a Lukan LXXism, according to Fitzmyer.
The shorter readings in gB and B&plus;W are adjustments to normal Greek usage.
The reading of 4&plus;1424 is derived from gA, possibly conflated with gB.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:24, variant number 7 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGERQEIS EPETIMHSE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> DIEGERQEIS EPETIMHSE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 8:26, which reads like gA.
<p>Cf. Mark 4:39 which resembles gB, the context matching Luke a bit
more closely than Matthew does.
The gB reading harmonizes to <q lang=grc>DIHGEIRAN</q> in the preceding context.
Colwell says early scribes harmonized to the immediate context much more
often than to synoptic parallels.
<q lang=grc>DIEGERQEIS</q> is possibly more Lukan in isolation, but Luke might
well prefer to vary his verb choice here.
Cadbury [Cad] says that Luke likes to repeat, but varying the form in which
the concept is expressed again.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:25, variant number 8 </head>
<label lang=grc> FOBHQENTES DE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; B	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> OI DE FOBHQENTES </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 8:27 and Mark 4:41.
Neither synoptic matches exactly, but Luke looks like a combination
of Matt&plus;Mark.  If so, gB resembles Matthew, so that there is
some chance of gB having harmonized to Matthew.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:27, variant number 9 </head>
<label lang=grc> EK XRONWN IKANWN KAI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph;C1 892 </>
<label lang=grc> KAI XRONW IKANW </>
  <item> &aleph;* &aleph;C2 B L </>
<label lang=grc> APO XRONWN IKANWN OS </>
  <item> D </>
<label lang=grc> KAI XRONW POLLW </>
  <item> 1 1582 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 8:28 and Mark 5:3-5, where there is no match.
<p>Metzger p145 suggests a change was caused by a confusion in construing
the phrase as "naked a long time" or "possessed a long time".
The latter seems more reasonable in the story, so it is both more likely
to be Luke's expression just as much as it is more likely to be copied.
I have no other idea why one reading would change to the other preferentially.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:27, variant number 10 </head>
<label lang=grc> IMATION OUK ENEDIDUSKETO </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph;C1 892 </>
<label lang=grc> OUK ENEDUSATO IMATION </>
  <item> &aleph;* &aleph;C2 B L </>
<label lang=grc> IMATIA OUK ENEDIDUSKETO </>
  <item> f Sp Sh(mg) Dta Dtp Go </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Clothing is not mentioned in Mark 5 or Matt 8.
The gB reading is due to harmonization to the immediate context:
other verbs nearby are aorist in narrative, imperfect for his circumstances.
gA has the only perfect.
<!-- (Also, the perfect might possibly
be misinterpreted as his not being dressed for the occasion.) -->

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:28, variant number 11 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI ANAKRACAS </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> ANAKRACAS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 8:29, Mark 5:7, Mark 1:23-24, and Luke 4:34,
where the wording is not parallel.
The <q lang=grc> KAI</q> in gA connecting two circumstantial participles
may not be good classical usage,
particularly followed by the <q lang=grc>KAI FWNH MEGALH EIPE</q>. (true??)

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:29, variant number 12 </head>
<label lang=grc> EDESMEITO </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EDESMEUETO </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 5:3-4 where the wording is not parallel.
<p>Cf. Matt 8 where no chains are mentioned.
<p>The <mentioned lang=grc>DESMEW</> entry in LSJM says that the word
is equivalent to <mentioned lang=grc>DESMEUW</>, but the form was
denigrated by Moeris as un-Attic.
Judging also by the number of Bauer citations, the gA form is less usual.
Accordingly, gB is a correction from a less common, unapproved, Koine spelling
to a more common Attic form.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:30, variant number 13 </head>
<label lang=grc> ESTIN ONOMA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ONOMA ESTIN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. the Mark 5:9 parallel, which reads without a verb.
<p>Bauer p570 says that the copula is unusual with <q lang=grc>ONOMA</q>.
The examples listed all had <q lang=grc>ONOMA</q> immediately next to
the pronoun for the person named.
Reading gB could be a correction of gA to a more usual word order.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:31, variant number 14 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI PAREKALEI AUTON </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> KAI PAREKALOUN AUTON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> W </>
<label lang=grc> PAREKALOUN DE </>
  <item> D d </>
<label lang=grc> PAREKALEI OUN AUTON </>
  <item> 22 1192 1210 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 8:31 <q lang=grc>PAREKALOUN</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 5:10,12 <q lang=grc>PAREKALEI</q>, <q lang=grc>PAREKALESAN</q>,
with no reading exactly matching Luke.
The Markan synoptic parallel is closer in form,
but Matt in general is better known.
<p>Matt has two men, Mark masculine plural.
The form <q lang=grc>DAIMONIA</q> is neuter plural,
but it later takes a plural verb.
Reading gA could be a grammatical correction or a harmonization
to match <q lang=grc>EISELQEN</q>.
Reading gB could be a harmonization to all the nearby plurals.
The singular is ambiguous as to whether the man or the daemons is meant.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:32, variant number 15 </head>
<label lang=grc> PAREKALOUN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph;* </>
<label lang=grc> PAREKALESAN </>
  <item> &aleph;C B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PAREKALEI </>
  <item> 5 27* 229* </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 8:31 <q lang=grc>PAREKALOUN</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 5:10,12 <q lang=grc>PAREKALEI</q>, <q lang=grc>PAREKALESAN</q>,
and Luke 8:31 (see the entry for that other variant).
The miniscules harmonized to prior context.
The Markan synoptic parallel is closer in form,
but Matt in general is better known.
The aorist is better suited to the meaning,
but the imperfect was used a verse back in many MSS.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:36, variant number 16 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI OI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> OI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 8:34, which does not match closely.
<p>Cf. Mark 5:16, which is similar without <q lang=grc>KAI</q>,
but harmonization appears unlikely.
<p>There are no strong reasons to prefer either reading.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:37, variant number 17 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIS TO PLOION </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EIS PLOION </label>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> D d l </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Mark 5:18 which has <q lang=grc>EIS TO PLOION</q>
but no other matching wording in the context.
A boat was mentioned in verses 22-26,
which is so far distant that <q lang=grc>TO</q>
might feel strange either present or absent.
Could it be the same boat or a different one?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:38, variant number 18 </head>
<label lang=grc> O IHSOUS LEGWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> LEGWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Mark 5:19, which is not close.
<p> Th referent of <q lang=grc>AUTON</q> is less than obvious,
if the reader is not attentive.
The subject supplied by gA is inferrable from context with slight thought.
The previous sentence has <q lang=grc>AUTOU</q> and <q lang=grc>AUTW</q>
referring to the healed man.
Variant gB is harder to read,
but the subject supplied by gA might have seemed prolix to some copyists.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:39, variant number 19 </head>
<label lang=grc> EPOIHSE SOI </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> SOI EPOIHSE </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 W </>
<label lang=grc> EPOIHSE SOU </>
  <item> L L859 </>
<label lang=grc> SOI PEPOIHKEN </>
  <item> R 1342 Cyr </>
<label lang=grc> SOU EPOIHSEN </>
  <item> D (with trans.) </>
<label lang=grc> PEPOIHKEN </>
  <item> 579 </>
<label lang=grc> EPOIHSE </>
  <item> 1229 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 5:19, where the word order is not very similar.
The gA word order is a bit clearer, easier to read.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:45, variant number 20 </head>
<label lang=grc> APOQLIBOUSI KAI LEGEIS TIS O AYAMENOS MOU </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> APOQLIBOUSI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> APOQLIBOUSI KAI LEGEIS TIS MOU HYATO </>
  <item> D &Psi; 28 it </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Metzger on p. 146 says omission of the clause could be due to stylistic
pruning by Alexandrian copyists, and that addition of the clause
with diverse wording could be a scribal assimilation to Mark 5:31.
<p>The wording of D looks a lot like synoptic harmonization,
especially seeing that <q lang=grc>HYATO</q> is the form in Mark,
while a quotation from the start of verse 45 would read
<q lang=grc>O AYAMENOS</q>.
If gA is due to synoptic harmonization,
it would require borrowing the thought from Mark and then
accomodating the verb form to match that found earlier in the verse.
The additional clause is not demanded by the context,
it might even be regarded as disrespectful of Peter to say it.
These considerations pro/con seem to be balanced.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:46, variant number 21 </head>
<label lang=grc> ECELQOUSAN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ECELHLUQUIAN </>
  <item> &aleph; B (L 892 -QIAN) </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Mark 5:30, which has the word <q lang=grc>ECELQOUSAN</q>,
but the surrounding context does not match up.
<p>The context in Luke 8:47 has several -<q lang=grc>OUSA</q> participles,
but in third-person narration, not quotation.
Kilpatrick (ref?? check Sturz) says that the perfect tense was unusual
in the first century,
but was frequently an Attic refinement of early copyists.
<p>The considerations of harmonization and style refinement are balanced.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:48, variant number 22 </head>
<label lang=grc> QARSEI QUGATER </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> QUGATER </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 9:22, which is like gA.
<p>Cf. Mark 5:34, which is like gB.
<p>An omission by homoioarchon of one letter has a small probability.
Matthew is usually more popular as a source for synoptic harmonization,
but my impression is that gB harmonizes to Mark more often than gA does.
The conflicting evidence makes no preference posible.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:49, variant number 23 </head>
<label lang=grc> LEGWN AUTW </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> LEGWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>The object <q lang=grc>AUTW</q> is confusing
because the referent would seem to be Jesus
judged from the preceding context,
but <q lang=grc>SOU</q> makes you realize that
it refers to Jairus, mentioned way back in verses 41-42.
This confusing ambiguity was fixed by gB deleting it.
<p>Kilpatrick (Kilpatrick 1963) points out reasons for preferring
readings with more pronouns.
<q type=displayed>
Manuscripts vary considerably over the pronouns,
especially <mentioned lang=grc>AUTOS</mentioned>.
At the same point in the text the pronoun will be present
in some witnesses and absent in others.
Two considerations are in favour of the text with the pronoun.
First, the suffixed pronouns of Semitic idiom
are much commoner than the pronouns are in Classical Greek.
Secondly, Hellenistic Greek, less terse and more explicit
than Classical Greek, makes more use of the pronouns than
the older language does.
If the pronouns are original in the text,
then the return to Attic brevity would encourage scribes
rigourously to cut down on the generous use of the pronouns
that their texts displayed.
</q>

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:50, variant number 24 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTW LEGWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AUTW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Mark 5:36, which is not relevant for harmonization.
<p>Reading gA, the redundant <q lang=grc>LEGWN</q>, is a Lukan LXXism,
corrected to greek style by gB.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:51, variant number 25 </head>
<label lang=grc> IWANNHN KAI IAKWBON </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; (B -ANHN)	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> IAKWBON KAI IWANNHN </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 A	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Mark 5:37, which is like gB.
<p>The usual order of names is Peter-James-John,
so gB has harmonized the order to what is usual.
One possible explanation for Luke's choice of the gA order of names
is Fitzmyer's suggestion that Peter and John were closely
associated in Acts, and Luke was aware that James had died, so Luke
would naturally place James last.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:52, variant number 26 </head>
<label lang=grc> OUK </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> OU GAR </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Mark 5:39, which is like gA.
<p>Cf. Matt 9:24, which is like gB, Matthew being better-known than Mark.
The added <q lang=grc>GAR</q> makes the reading smoother.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:54, variant number 27 </head>
<label lang=grc> EKBALWN PANTAS ECW KAI KRATHSAS </>
  <item> A W &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> KRATHSAS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> EKBALWN ECW PANTAS KAI KRATHSAS </>
  <item> Y &Psi; f13 Maj TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Matt 9:25 and Mark 5:40-41.
The concept of throwing everyone out, without the word <q lang=grc>ECW</q>,
is found in Matthew and Mark, with Mark being the closer match.
With the words in the context being paraphrased to this extent,
there is just a weak likelihood of synoptic harmonization.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 8:54, variant number 28 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGEIROU </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EGEIRE </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EGEIRAI </>
  <item> L min(10x) Chry(1/2) </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Matt 9:25, where there is no match for harmonization.
<p>Cf. Mark 5:41 <q lang=grc>EGEIRE</> or <q lang=grc>EGEIRAI</q>,
which is like gB or L, but the context is a loose match.
<p>Cf. Luke 7:14 <q lang=grc>EGERQETI</q>.
<p>Elsewhere in the NT <q lang=grc>EGEIRE</q> always causes variants
with <q lang=grc>EGEIRAI</q> by itacism.
Reading gA seems smoother, easier.
<!-- why smoother?? what tenses are these?? -->

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:01, variant number 29 </head>
<label lang=grc> DWDEKA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; B	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> DWDEKA APOSTOLOUS </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> DWDEKA MAQHTAS AUTOU </>
  <item> CC3 1010 it TR </>
<label lang=grc> DWDEKA MAQHTAS </>
  <item> &Omega;C Go </>
<label lang=grc> DWDEKA AUTOU </>
  <item> Ss Sc Sp </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Metzger p146 draws vague parallels to Mark 6:7 (re: A W &Pi;)
and Matt 10:1 (re: CC3 1010).
The variety of wordings in the additions suggests vacuum filling.
Could there be a concern in copyists minds
that the twelve apostles weren't yet called apostles?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:03, variant number 30 </head>
<label lang=grc> RABDOUS </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> RABDON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 10:10, which exhibits the same variation as here.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:8, which says: take only one staff.
<p>The gB singular could be a harmonization to the immediate context of
nearby singular nouns, if <q lang=grc>RABDOUS</q> was originally intended
in a distributed sense, referring to one staff apiece.
On the other hand, it is about equally likely that
reading gA could be a harmonization to avoid a seeming contradiction with Mark.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:03, variant number 31 </head>
<label lang=grc> ANA DUO </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892	[NA26] </>
<label lang=grc> DUO </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Metzger p147 says that <q lang=grc>ANA</q> is implicit from the context,
addable by a copyist,
or that Alexandrian scribes deleted <q lang=grc>ANA</q> to harmonize
to the synoptic Matt 10:10 and Mark 6:9.
What is implicit and addable is just as well deletable as superfluous.
<p>Fitzmyer said that gB is synoptic harmonization due to the inelegant greek
of <q lang=grc>ANA DUO</q>.
The variants with <q lang=grc>RABDOUS</q> suggest that distributive use
is not clearly implicit in the phrasing.
In the versions <q lang=grc> DUO</q> without express <q lang=grc>ANA</q>
found in Lvt(10x) Lvg Sc Sp Sj sa bo arm geo.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:05, variant number 32 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI TON </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> TON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 10:14 like gB, not close.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:11 not very relevant.
<p>Cf. Luke 10:10-11 like gA, not close.
<p>Cf. Acts 13:51 not very relevant.
<p>Synoptic harmonization is not very likely.
<p>gA <q lang=grc>KAI</q> is grammatically superfluous
(and therefore problematic) unless understood in the sense of "even".
Is gB a misunderstanding correction?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:07, variant number 33 </head>
<label lang=grc> GINOMENA UP AUTOU </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> GINOMENA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Mark 6:14 and Matt 14:1, which do not match as potential causes of
harmonization.
Reading gA seems to be an explanatory clarification of gB.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:07, variant number 34 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGHGERTAI EK NEKRWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> HGERQH EK NEKRWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EK NEKRWN ANESTH </>
  <item> D c e </>
<label lang=grc> HGERQH APO TWN NEKRWN </>
  <item> f13 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 14:2 <q lang=grc>HGERQH APO</q>, where the verb is like gB,
but the whole is like f13.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:14, where different text groupings exhibit many readings
like the first three listed above.
<p>The perfect tense in gA differs from the surrounding context,
but seems to be reasonable.
Kilpatrick thought the perfect tense was often an Atticizing refinement.
Is this a refined usage?
<p>f13 seems like a synoptic harmonization.
<p>gB looks like a harmonization to the surrounding context of aorist verbs.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:08, variant number 35 </head>
<label lang=grc> PROFHTHS EIS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> PROFHTHS TIS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PROFHTHS </>
  <item> D pc a e d Sp Sj Dta </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Mark 6:15, which has a slight resemblance to gA.
<p>gD might be due to homoioteleuton.
<p>gB is a more Lukan expression.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:09, variant number 36 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI EIPEN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EIPEN DE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:16 not relevant.
<p>The expression in gA is more Koine, less Attic.
But, is gB more Lukan?
The other gospel writers strongly prefer to express <q>and he said</q>
by means of <q lang=grc>KAI EIPEN</q> or <q lang=grc>KAI LEGEI</q>,
instead of <q lang=grc>EIPEN DE</q>,
but Luke is distinguished in his using <q lang=grc>EIPEN DE</q>
a little bit more frequently than <q lang=grc>KAI EIPEN</q>.
Does than mean that copyists should be expected to alter a Lukan
<q lang=grc>EIPEN DE</q> to a <q lang=grc>KAI EIPEN</q> commonly seen
in the other gospels?  It seems not.
<p>
In the book of Luke, there are about 57 units of variation where
the text reads one form of <q>and he said</q> which is firm,
but a singular or subsingular variant reading has a different form.
Analyzing these cases,
where the copyist is caught red-handed making a stylistic change,
helps us diagnose what corruptions are most popular among copyists.
These variant renderings of the sense <q>and he said</q>
include instances of <q lang=grc>EIPEN</q>,
<q lang=grc>ELEGEN</q>, <q lang=grc>LEGEI</q>,
<q lang=grc>EFH</q>, or <q lang=grc>FHSI</q>,
combined with either <q lang=grc>KAI</q>, <q lang=grc>DE</q>,
or <q lang=grc>O DE</q>.
While in nine units of variation an expression with <q lang=grc>DE</q>
was altered to one with <q lang=grc>KAI</q>, in ten instances the reverse
occurred, approximately balanced.
Similarly, <q lang=grc>DE</q> expressions were changed to <q lang=grc>O DE</q>
in nine place, and the reverse in seven places.
Expression using <q lang=grc>O DE</q> were altered
by scribes to use <q lang=grc>KAI</q> in five cases, and the reverse
occurred in four cases.  No one-sided trend is visible here,
and it seems reasonable to conclude that even if Luke is the only Gospel
writer to frequently write <q lang=grc>EIPEN DE</q>,
copyists were fairly evenly divided in their preferences on this issue.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:09, variant number 37 </head>
<label lang=grc> HRWDES </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph;	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> O HRWDES </>
  <item> B L 892	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Mark 6:16, where the Alexandrians and most Byzantines have the article.
<p>Cf. Matt 14:1-2, which does not match.
<p>The article would be expected in this context, since Herod
has already been introduced.  Since NA26 forsakes its favored text type
here, its editors probably agree that internal evidence favors gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:09, variant number 38 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGW AKOUW </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AKOUW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>One finds <q lang=grc> EGW</q> in preceding clauses as the subject.
Was the word pruned here as excessive, or introduced as an echo?
See variant number 23 for the general reasoning of Kilpatrick.
<!-- should L justify changing to gA? -->

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:10, variant number 39 </head>
<label lang=grc> BHQSAIDAN </>
  <item> A W Y </>
<label lang=grc> BHQSAIDA </>
  <item> &aleph;* B 892 &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> BIQSAIDAN </>
  <item> L </>
<label lang=grc> BIQSAIDA </>
  <item> &Psi; 047 </>
<label lang=grc> BHDSAIDA </>
  <item> &aleph;C p75 N </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:45, which provides no cogent parallel.
<p>Bauer says that this name is indeclinable.
Accusative usage with -<q lang=grc>AN</q> can however be found.
Luke uses <q lang=grc>KALOUMENOS</q> with the following noun
generally in the same case,
like an appositive, e.g. <q lang=grc>NAIN</q>.
This probably would not differ from the usage expected by a copyist.
Generally, the gA preceding context is <q lang=grc>KALOUMENOS</q>,
and for gB <q lang=grc>KALOUMENHN</q>.
Either could cause a correction depending on the original text in
the preceding context, which is badly split.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:11, variant number 40 </head>
<label lang=grc> DECAMENOS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> APODECAMENOS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:34-35, Matt 14:14 which provide no parallel
relevant for harmonization.
<p>The gB reading is a little more Lukan and slightly less common.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:12, variant number 41 </head>
<label lang=grc> APELQONTES </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> POREUQENTES </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 14:15 and Mark 6:36, which are loosely parallel to gA,
synoptic harmonization being a possibility.
After <q lang=grc>APOLUSON</q> and before
<q lang=grc>EIS TAS KUKLW KWMAS</q>, the prefix <q lang=grc>APO-</q>
might be seen as pleonastic.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:13, variant number 42 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIPON OUK </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EIPAN OUK </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. John 6:8, Matt 14:7, and Mark 6:38, which provide no relevant match.
<p>Reading gA has better Attic spelling, but neither is uncommon.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:14, variant number 43 </head>
<label lang=grc> KLISIAS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> KLISIAS WSEI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892	[NA26] </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Mark 6:39, which loosely resembles gA more than gB.
<p>Cf. John 6:10, which is not relevant.
<p>gB <q lang=grc>WSEI</q> may have been added based on the context
at the start of the verse.
Softening exactness of the count might have been desired
in view of Mark's mention of 100's and 50's.
The word <q lang=grc>WSEI</q> is somewhat Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:15, variant number 44 </head>
<label lang=grc> ANEKLINAN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> KATEKLINAN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 14:19a, Mark 6:39, which have slight relevance.
<p>Cf. John 6:10, which is not relevant.
<p>The gB reading harmonizes to the immediately preceding context
of Jesus' directions.
Besides, Luke would likely vary the verb form
when he repeats the concept of reclining.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:15, variant number 45 </head>
<label lang=grc> APANTAS 9:16 </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; B	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> PANTAS 9:16 </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Mark 6:39, which is not relevant.
<p>The word <q lang=grc>APAS</q> is quite Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:18, variant number 46 </head>
<label lang=grc> LEGOUSIN OI OXLOI </>
  <item> W Y &Pi;	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> OI OXLOI LEGOUSIN </>
  <item> &aleph;* B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> LEGOUSIN OI ANQRWPOI </>
  <item> A 0211 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 16:13, Mark 8:27, which resemble A&plus;0211 closely,
so gA is less likely to be a synoptic harmonization than those MSS are.
<p>Why did the editors of NA26 change the text here from NA25?
Because of p75?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:27, variant number 47 </head>
<label lang=grc> TWN WDE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> TWN AUTOU </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 16:28 and Mark 9:1 <q lang=grc>WDE</q>, but in various word orders.
<p>gA might be a synoptic harmonization.
Birdsall said (ref??) <q>The locative <mentioned lang=grc>AUTOU</>
is glossed in the lexicon of Hesychius, although the
interpretation is not <mentioned lang=grc>WDE</>.</q>
Fitzmyer p. 789 says that <q lang=grc>AUTOU</q> usually means
<q rend=quoted>there</q>
instead of <q rend=quoted>here</q>,
which seems less imminent.
A copyist could have introduced <q lang=grc>AUTOU</q>
to relieve a theological difficulty
due to the delayed coming of the kingdom.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:27, variant number 48 </head>
<label lang=grc> ECTWTWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ECTHKOTWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892?	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 16:28 where the Byzantines read <q lang=grc>ESTWTES</q>
and the Alexandrians read <q lang=grc>ESTWTON</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 9:1 <q lang=grc>ESTHKOTWN</q> with variants.
<p>gA might have borrowed from an Alexandrian text of Matt,
or gB could have borrowed from any text of Mark.
Might reading gB be the commoner form?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:27, variant number 49 </head>
<label lang=grc> OITINES </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> OI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 9:1, Matt 16:28, both of which read <q lang=grc>OITINES</q>.
Synoptic harmonization is possible here.
<p>Bauer on p587 says that this usage of <q lang=grc>OSTIS</q>
instead of <q lang=grc>OS</q> is later Greek,
rarely classic.  gB could be an Attic correction.
<p>The evidence is in conflict.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:33, variant number 50 </head>
<label lang=grc> PETROS </>
  <item> A W Y </>
<label lang=grc> O PETROS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 &Pi;	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Mark 9:5 and Matt 17:4, both of which read <q lang=grc>O PETROS</q>.
Peter was introduced without the article in verse 28,
and referred to again in verse 32 with the article.
Reading gB either harmonizes to the Synoptics or conforms the text
to more consistent usage of the article with known entities.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:34, variant number 51 </head>
<label lang=grc> EPECKIASEN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EPECKIAZEN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Matt 17:5 <q lang=grc>EPESKIASEN</q>, and
cf. Mark 9:7 <q lang=grc>EPESKIAZOUSA</q>.
gA could have been assimilated to match Matthew.
<p>Birdsall (ref??) suggests that <q lang=grc>EPESKIASEN</q>
was perhaps harmonized to match the tense of <q lang=grc>EGENETO</q>,
and that the imperfect <q lang=grc>EPESKIAZEN</q>
is more subtle than the aorist,
<q rend=quoted>began to overshadow</q> coinciding with
<q rend=quoted>as they entered the cloud</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:34, variant number 52 </head>
<label lang=grc> EKEINOUS EISELQEIN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EISELQEIN AUTOUS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> EISELQEIN </>
  <item> p75 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 17:5 and Mark 9:7, which do not have this clause.
Reading gA <q lang=grc>EKEINOUS</q> sounds almost as if
the heavenly beings are the subject of the sentence.
A reading of <q lang=grc>EKEINOUS</q> is hard to understand,
gB <q lang=grc>AUTOUS</q> is easier.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:35, variant number 53 </head>
<label lang=grc> AGAPHTOS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EKLELEGMENOS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AGAPHTOS MOU </>
  <item> Sc Ephr </>
<label lang=grc> EKLEKTOS </>
  <item> &Theta; 1 </>
<label lang=grc> AGAPHTOS EN W HUDOKHSA/EUDOKHSA </>
  <item> CC3 D &Psi; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. 2 Pe 1:17 <q lang=grc>AGAPHTOS</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 1:11 <q lang=grc>AGAPHTOS</q>.
<p>Cf. Matt 3:17 and 12:18 <q lang=grc>AGAPHTOS</q>.
<p>Cf. Ps 2:7, which does not seem relevant.
<p>Cf. Isaiah 42:1, which has <q lang=grc>O EKLEKTOS MOU</q> in the LXX,
the referent being Israel.  The relevance is tenuous.
<p>Metzger on p. 148 says that the gB reading
is used in a quasi-technical sense, only here in the NT.
The other readings are more usual -- assimilation of:
&Theta; to Luke 23:35, gA to Mark 9:7 or Luke 3:22, D to Matt 17:5.
I would say &Theta; is not a harmonization to such a distant parallel.
Harmonization to parallels is the most likely explanation for gA.
Ehrman [Ehr] comments on this verse on pp. 65-68.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:37, variant number 54 </head>
<label lang=grc> EN TH ECHS HMERA </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> TH ECHS HMERA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W </>
<label lang=grc> DIA THS HMERAS </>
  <item> D it Ss Sc </>
<label lang=grc> THS HMERAS </>
  <item> p45 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Other Lukan uses of <q lang=grc>ECHS</q> leave the noun implied.
In 7:11 the implicit noun was confusing and caused textual variation.
Attic usage of <q lang=grc>ECHS</q> is adverbial, not adjectival.
NT usage of the word seems to be adjectival.
Three instances in Acts have no preposition,
one instance in Luke is with a preposition.
The <q lang=grc>EN</q> is not needed but may be helpful in the sentence,
and Lukan usage is divided.

<p>Hort, Notes p. 59, says that the creation of the D reading was
<q rend=quoted>due to a desire to keep the two incidents
connected in time, no interval being expressed in Matthew and Mark.</q>

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:38, variant number 55 </head>
<label lang=grc> ANEBOHSE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EBOHSE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 17:14 and Mark 9:17, neither of which are relevant to the variant.
According to Bauer on p. 51,
<q lang=grc>ANABOEW</q> is rare and causes variant readings, (e.g. Mark 15:8)
The alternative <q lang=grc>BOAW</q> is common and not strongly Lukan.
Reading gB is a scribal correction of an uncommon to a more common term.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:38, variant number 56 </head>
<label lang=grc> ECTI MOI </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> MOI ESTI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 17:15 and Mark 9:17, which do not match closely enough
to bear on this word order issue.
<p>This dative construction is less common.<!-- than what -->
Reading gA is a little plainer, but there is little difference.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:41, variant number 57 </head>
<label lang=grc> TON UION SOU WDE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> WDE TON UION SOU </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892	TR </>
<label lang=grc> TON UION SOU </>
  <item> D </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 17:17, which bears a slight resemblance to gA in word order.
<p>Cf. Mark 9:19, which does not match the text in question.
<p>Reading gA is a little plainer, but there is little difference.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:43, variant number 58 </head>
<label lang=grc> EPOIHSEN </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EPOIEI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>No relevant synoptic parallel.
<p>The imperfect tense is more suitable to the context than aorist,
but this might be a scribal correction.  The context has both tenses nearby.
If a correction occurred, gB is more likely it,
because of <q lang=grc>PASIN</q> suggesting repetition or generality.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:48, variant number 59 </head>
<label lang=grc> ECTAI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> ECTI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> ECTE </>
  <item> D 0211 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 18:4, which has the present tense, but a slight resemblance only.
<p>Mark 9:37 is not a match.
<p>The gB present tense might be a harmonization to the present
tense apodoses in the preceding clauses.
<p>The gA future tense might relieve the superficial contradiction
of <q lang=grc>MIKROTEROS</q> and <q lang=grc>MEGAS</q>.
<p>The evidence is in conflict.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:49, variant number 60 </head>
<label lang=grc> EPI TW </>
  <item> A W &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EN TW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 Y </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Mark 9:38, where the Byzantines have a bare dative,
and the Alexandrians have <q lang=grc>EN TW ONOMATI</q>.
<p>The gB <q lang=grc>EN TW</q> is more common usage in NT and elsewhere.
On this, see Bauer pp. 572-3.
In the NT, <q lang=grc>EPI TW ONOMATI</q> occurs only in Matt/Mark/Luke/Acts.
gB may well be a synoptic harmonization and/or correction to common usage.
<p>The gA reading might have been affected by the similar phrase
in the preceding verse,
although the topic of casting out daemons is rather distant from
that of receiving children.
Fitzmyer on p. 820 says that the collocation of the two stories here,
of the little child and of the exorcist, was due to the repeated
catch-phrase "in the name of".  This suggests the preposition ought
to be the same in Luke's original composition.
<p>I am unsure whether Luke's tendency to repeat words with variation
applies here.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:49, variant number 61 </head>
<label lang=grc> EKWLUSAMEN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EKWLUOMEN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Mark 9:38, which has the same split of readings between
the Alexandrians and Byzantines.
<p>The context seems to demand the aorist, both in the mind of Luke and
the mind of a copyist.
Reading gB is slightly harder.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:50, variant number 62 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI EIPE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EIPEN DE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 9:39 <q lang=grc>O DE IHSOUS EIPE</q>, which would not
occasion synoptic assimilation.
See the discussion under variant 36 on the different Greek expressions meaning
<q rend=quoted>and he said</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:52, variant number 63 </head>
<label lang=grc> EAUTOU </>
  <item> A W Y </>
<label lang=grc> AUTOU </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 &Pi;	TR </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> p45 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>No synoptic parallels are relevant.
Reading <q lang=grc>AUTOU</q> might be a little ambiguous.
Reading <q lang=grc>EAUTOU</q> might seem too much, especially as "his face"
was just mentioned in the preceding verse.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:54, variant number 64 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIPON KURIE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EIPAN KURIE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Synoptic parallels are not relevant.
<p>Reading gA has better Attic spelling, but neither is uncommon.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:54, variant number 65 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTOUS WS KAI HLIAS EPOIHSE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AUTOUS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Metzger p148 says that the additions here and in verses 55-56
are possibly glosses from some external source, oral or written.
Fitzmyer agrees, saying that a copyist noted the allusion to 2Kg 1:10,12
and glossed it in this verse.

<p>J M Ross (Ross 1972) definitely supports the authenticity of the
words in verses 55-56 omitted by NA26, and I find his arguments persuasive.
This casts some doubt on Metzger's attribution of all the additions
in these three verses to glossing from some external source.

<p>Ross brings out the following arguments relative to vs. 54,
but finds the evidence rather evenly balanced.
Zahn (Intro to the NT III 24) thought that all the suspected words in
verses 54-56 were struck out to prevent the Marcionites from
using them as a weapon against Orthodox Christianity.
Easton and Manson thought this improbable.
It appears from Tertullian's comments that Marcion could have
made his point without the additional words.
Hort said the words <q rend=quoted>were just the gloss for a Marcionite
exegete to have made, since it kept before the reader's mind
one of the main points of the system of Marcion.</q>
Plummer, Lagrange, and others agreed with Hort.
Loisy said of these words, <q lang=fra>Elles semblent
&ecirc;tre en surcharge dans la strophe.</q>
Such poetical considerations have not been accorded much weight by others.
Van Osterzee, Bond, and Lowther Clark say that the words in question
were felt to reflect unnecessarily on the great prophet Elijah.
Van Osterzee thought the disciples felt it necessary to invoke
the support of Elijah for an otherwise preposterous request.

<p>Bover (Bover 1953) discusses the four pieces of text in verses 54-56
which are questionable, but which are added or omitted in at least
eight different combinations found in the witnesses.
He agrees with Lagrange that these pieces of text are homogeneous,
of common origin, and of identical <q lang=esp>tendencia</>.
Bover thought that the most likely explanation for the diverse
combinations of additions/omissions here is that the full text
was frequently seen as giving too much support to the Marcionites,
and that different copyists relieved this problem by omitting
different parts of or even all of the offending material.

<p>Even though I tend to agree with Bover and Ross, the conflicting
opinions published regarding the phrase about Elijah force me
to enter a <q rend=quoted>no preference</q> judgement, on account of
divided evidence.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:57, variant number 66 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGENETO DE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> KAI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> KAI EGENETO </>
  <item> D f13 e a c d r1 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 8:19, which is not relevant to the variation.
<p>The gA reading is a prominent Lukan LXXism.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:57, variant number 67 </head>
<label lang=grc> APERXH KURIE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> APERXH </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 8:19, which matches gB closely.
<p>Devotional expansion might add the honorific.
Synoptic harmonization might delete it.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:60, variant number 68 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTW O IHSOUS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AUTW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 8:22 <q lang=grc>O DE IHSOUS EIPEN</q> or <q lang=grc>LEGEI</q>
has Jesus as the subject,
but the wording difference makes synoptic harmonization unlikely.
<p>An explicit subject might have been added for clarity
or deleted as superfluous.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 9:62, variant number 69 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIS THN BASILEIAN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> TH BASILEIA </>
  <item> &aleph;* B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EN TH BASILEIA </>
  <item> &aleph;C2 p75 1241 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>No synoptic parallel.
<p>From Bauer on p. 320: <q lang=grc>EUQETOS</q>,
meant originally <q rend=quoted>well-placed</q>, later <q rend=quoted>fit</q>,
or <q rend=quoted>suitable</q>.
The other use of <q lang=grc>EUQETOS</q> in Luke
is followed by <q lang=grc>EIS</q>.
The use in Hebrews and the first dictionary entry employs a bare dative.
Bauer records both usages.  gA is possibly more Lukan than gB.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:01, variant number 70 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI ETEROUS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph; </>
<label lang=grc> ETEROUS </>
  <item> B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p><q lang=grc>KAI</q> might seem superfluous with <q lang=grc>ETEROUS</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:02, variant number 71 </head>
<label lang=grc> ELEGEN OUN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ELEGEN DE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EIPE DE </>
  <item> f1 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Luke 9:3 and Matt 9:37, to which no assimilation occurred.
<p>Reading gB <q lang=grc>ELEGEN DE</q> might be more Lukan than
<q lang=grc>ELEGEN OUN</q>, except see Bauer p593, 2a.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:04, variant number 72 </head>
<label lang=grc> MHDE UPODHMATA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> MH UPODHMATA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> MHTE UPODHMATA </>
  <item> M 13 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 10:10 <q lang=grc>MHDE UPODHMATA</q> addressed to the 12.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:8-9 all <q lang=grc>MH</q>, but no <q lang=grc>UPODHMATA</q>.
<p>Cf. Luke 9:3 <q lang=grc>MHTE</q> but no <q lang=grc>UPODHMATA</q>.
<p>The f13 reading appears similar to the Luke 9 conjunctions, but is more
likely just a misspelling of the gA reading.
The gB conjunction is as in Mark,
except <q lang=grc>UPODHMATA</q> is missing there.
Reading gA might be a harmonization to Matthew 10,
but the order of items differs there,
and different attributes are attached.
None of these are convincingly synoptic harmonizations.
<p>The gA reading seems to break the pattern
that <q lang=grc>MHDE</q> be used in
all but the first of terms in a series (sometimes the first also).
Here only the third term has <q lang=grc>MHDE</q>;,
which might get corrected to the gB reading for consistency.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:07, variant number 73 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTOU ESTI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AUTOU </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. 1Tim 5:18, which matches gB throughout the clause,
except for <q lang=grc>GAR</q>.
<p>Cf. Matt 10:10, which has the same gA/gB variation,
and using <q lang=grc>TROFAS</q> instead of <q lang=grc>MISQOU</q>.
Reading gB is more likely a harmonization to the parallels than is gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:08, variant number 74 </head>
<label lang=grc> D AN </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; L </>
<label lang=grc> AN </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:10-11, without a relevant match.
<p>Cf. Matt 10:11  <q lang=grc>HN D'AN</q> without <q lang=grc>KAI</q>.
<p>Cf. Luke 9:4 <q lang=grc>KAI EIS HN AN OIKIAN</q>
<p>Cf. Luke 10:5  <q lang=grc>EIS HN D'AN</q> without <q lang=grc>KAI</q>
<p>Cf. Luke 10:10  <q lang=grc>EIS HN D'AN</q> without <q lang=grc>KAI</q>
<p>Either gA added <q lang=grc>D</q>' by harmonization to
Matthew or verse 5 or verse 15,
or gB deleted <q lang=grc>D'</q> as redundant after the <q lang=grc>KAI</q>.
Luke 9:4 suggests gB is a Lukan expression.
Harmonization in gA is the more likely explanation of the variation.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:10, variant number 75 </head>
<label lang=grc> EISERXHSQE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EISELQHTE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EISERXESQE </>
  <item> 047* 66* </>
<label lang=grc> EISERXESAI </>
  <item> &Theta; 2 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 10:11 <q lang=grc>POLIN H KWMHN EISELQHTE</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 6:10 <q lang=grc>EISELQHTE EIS OIKIAN</q>.
<p>Cf. Luke 9:4 <q lang=grc>OIKIAN EISELQHTE</q>.
<p>Cf. Luke 10:5, relative to <q lang=grc>OIKIAN</q>,
with a similar split between
<q lang=grc>EISERXHSQE</q> and <q lang=grc>EISELQHTE</q>.
<p>Cf. Luke 10:8 <q lang=grc>EISERXHSQE</q>.
<p>gB could have been harmonized to
Matt&plus;Mark&plus;Luke 9&plus;maybe Luke 10:5,
while gA could be harmonized to Luke 10:8.
The immediacy of verse 8 balances the large number of more distant parallels.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:11, variant number 76 </head>
<label lang=grc> UMWN EIS TOUS PODAS HMWN </>
  <item> A W &Pi; L </>
<label lang=grc> UMWN EIS TOUS PODAS </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 </>
<label lang=grc> UMWN </>
  <item> Y	Maj(NA) Maj(HF) TR </>
<label lang=grc> UMWN EIS TOUS PODAS UMWN </>
  <item> 6 205 Go OS </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Mark 6:11, Matt 10:14, and Luke 9:5, where the words do not match,
but the same thought is there.
The pronoun <q lang=grc>HMIN</q> is already expressed
and makes the possessive look a little redundant.
The Y&plus;TR reading was caused by homoioteleuton.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:11, variant number 77 </head>
<label lang=grc> HGGIKEN EF UMAS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> HGGIKEN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Matt 10:7, which is slightly similar, without <q lang=grc>EF UMAS</q>.
<p>The gA reading is a quote from the requirement in verse 9.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:13, variant number 78 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGENONTO </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EGENHQHSAN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EGENNHQHSAN </>
  <item> p75 579 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Matt 11:21, which is like gA.
<p>The gA imperfect could be a synoptic harmonization,
or the gB aorist could be a correction
to match the tense of <q lang=grc>METENOHSAN</q>.
The form <mentioned lang=grc>EGENHQHN</> is a first aorist passive which
is not Attic, but was common in later writers.
What about <mentioned lang=grc>EGENHQHSAN</>??

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:13, variant number 79 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAQHMENAI </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> KAQHMENOI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 11:21, with no relevant parallel word.
<p>Chorazin and Bethsaida are feminine.
The cities, not their inhabitants, are being directly addressed,
although the inhabitants would be the ones to repent.
Some attraction from the feminine <q lang=grc>GENOMENAI</q> may be felt.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:15, variant number 80 </head>
<label lang=grc> H EWS [TOU] OURANOU UYWQEISA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> MH EWS [TOU] OURANOU UYWQHSH; </>
  <item> &aleph; B* L </>
<label lang=grc> H EWS [TOU] OURANOU UYWQHSEI </>
  <item> BC2 579 </>
<label lang=grc> H EWS [TOU] OURANOU UYWQHS </>
  <item> 1582C Chry1/2 </>
<label lang=grc> H EWS [TOU] OURANOU UYWQHSA </>
  <item> K &Theta; 047 </>
</list>
<!-- the braces are not found in the uncial font -->

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Isaiah 14:13,15, where there is no relevant match.
<p>Cf. Matt 11:23, where there are many complex variants,
with similar but not the same attestation.
Witnesses C, D, 1, Lvg differ between Matt and Luke.  Did harmonization occur?

<q lang=grc> MH</q> requires a finite verb, <q lang=grc>H</q> a participle
if <q lang=grc>H</q> is an article,
or a finite verb if <q lang=grc>H</q> is a relative pronoun.
Let us assume the variation of adding/deleting
<q lang=grc>TOU</q> was independent of the variation above.
The finite verb in gB&plus;f1
parallels the apodosis of <q lang=grc>KATAB[IBASQ]HSE</q>.
Metzger says in reference to the Matthew passage that
<q lang=grc>MH</q> after <q lang=grc>KAFARNAOUM</q>
accidentally lost its initial M, then different corrections to the verb
attempted to repair the sense.
Was dittography or haplography more probable here?
Reading gA is more difficult because <q lang=grc>KAFARNAOUM</q>
was never actually glorified to the heights.
The relevant issue is the future reward the city will receive in the judgement.
Was itacism in the verb an issue? or the ambiguity of <q lang=grc>H</q>?

<p>Burgon (Burgon B-12,13) thought the question in gB meaningless, and that
Jesus was clearly announcing a fact, not raising a rhetorical question.
He attributes the variation to dittography of <q lang=grc>M</>,
followed by corresponding adjustments to the verb making the phrase a question.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:19, variant number 81 </head>
<label lang=grc> DIDWMI </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> DEDWKA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Reading gA was more difficult.
The topic is the Seventy's past experience of authority given.
The present tense is hard to fit in, except perhaps as a promise to
future missionaries.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:21, variant number 82 </head>
<label lang=grc> PNEUMATI </>
  <item> A W Y 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PNEUMATI TW AGIW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L &Pi; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Metzger on p. 152 says the gB reading is a strange, unparalleled expression,
which led to its omission.
Bauer on p. 675 under <q lang=grc>PNEUMA</q> (3b) has examples,
mostly from Luke&plus;John&plus;Paul,
of constructions analogous to gA.
It seems Luke localizes inner life in the <q lang=grc>PNEUMA</q>
and he tends to identify whose spirit or which spirit he refers to.
Reading gB may be an effort to disambiguate between the Holy Spirit
and Jesus' own spirit.
Is gB really that strange?  Not in concept, but perhaps in expression.
<p>
Comfort (p. 139-140) says scribes tended to add <q lang=grc>AGIW</q>
after <q lang=grc>PNEUMATI</q> in general, and in this case they
may have wanted to distinguish this mention of spirit from
that in the previous verse, which referred to evil spirits.
The (which??) expression is not found in the Gospels referring to Jesus.
<p>
Birdsall (ref??) said that there is a tendency to add
<q lang=grc>AGION</q> to <q lang=grc>PNEUMA</q>,
as variants at 3:16 and 12:10 show, so that gA is more likely original.
<p>The conflicing evidence and opinions prevent a verdict.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:21, variant number 83 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGENETO EUDOKIA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph; </>
<label lang=grc> EUDOKIA EGENETO </>
  <item> B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 11:26, with an identical context, exhibiting the same textual variation.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:21, variant number 84 </head>
<label lang=grc> SOU KAI STRAFEIS PROS TOUS MAQHTAS EIPE </>
  <item> A W Y </>
<label lang=grc> SOU </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 &Pi; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 11:26, which is a close match to reading gB.
<p>Metzger on p. 152 says that the gA reading
was derived from verse 23
to smooth an abrupt transition from prayer to instruction,
and says that mechanical repetition is not Lukan style
-- one does not turn to the same person twice.
<p>Was <q lang=grc>KAT IDIAN</q> there taken with <q lang=grc>EIPEN</q>?
Double <q lang=grc>STRAFEIS</q> would seem harder to a redactor/copyist.
Three miniscules ameliorate this difficulty by adding <q lang=grc>PALIN</q>
to the second <q lang=grc>STRAFEIS</q>.
If the gA reading were derived from verse 23, why duplicate
the transition, instead of moving it?
This repetition is not mechanical, with the second turning distinguished as
<q lang=grc>KAT IDIAN</q>,
(except in some Western witnesses).

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:25, variant number 85 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTON KAI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AUTON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>gA <q lang=grc>KAI</q> may seem superfluous by Attic standards, but it
is Koine, cf. Bauer under <q lang=grc>KAI</q>.
Cf. Matt 22:35 variant, not a synoptic parallel, but similar.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:27, variant number 86 </head>
<label lang=grc> EC OLHS THS YUXHS SOU KAI EC OLHS THS ISXUOS SOU KAI EC OLHS THS DIANOIAS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EN OLH TH YUXH SOU KAI EN OLH TH ISXUI SOU KAI EN OLH TH DIANOIA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> EN OLH YUXH SOU KAI EN OLH ISXUI SOU KAI EN OLH TH DIANOIA </>
  <item> f1 </>
<label lang=grc> EN OLH TH YUXH SOU KAI EC OLHS THS ISXUOS SOU KAI EN OLH TH DIANOIA </>
  <item> 1241 </>
<label lang=grc> EN OLH TH YUXH SOU KAI EC OLHS THS ISXUI SOU KAI EN OLH THS DIANOIAS </>
  <item> 0124 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Many other variants caused by scribal leap, haplography, dittography, etc.
Cf. Deu 6:5, 10:12, Jos 22:5, all have only <q lang=grc>EC OLHS</q>,
objects and pronouns vary.
Cf. Matt 22:37 all <q lang=grc>EN OLH [TH]</q>, lacking <q lang=grc>ISXUI</q>.
Cf. Mark 12:30 all <q lang=grc>EC OLHS THS</q>.
All witnesses in Luke but f1&plus;D&plus;lat have <q lang=grc>EC OLHS THS KARDIAS</q>
in first clause.
gA could be harmonization to LXX or Mark, gB to Matt.
gA likely to be harmonization to context, making all the prepositions equal.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:29, variant number 87 </head>
<label lang=grc> DIKAIOUN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> DIKAIWSAI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Both tenses can follow <q lang=grc>QELW</q> in Bauer.
Is one tense classically correct?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:30, variant number 88 </head>
<label lang=grc> HMIQANH TUGXANONTA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> HMIQANH </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p><q lang=grc> TUGXANW</q> is very Lukan.
The word may have seemed superfluous before <q lang=grc>KATA SUGKURIAN</q>(?).

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:32, variant number 89 </head>
<label lang=grc> GENOMENOS KATA TON TOPON ELQWN </>
  <item> A W Y </>
<label lang=grc> KATA TON TOPON ELQWN </>
  <item> &aleph;C2 B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> GENOMENOS KATA TON TOPON </>
  <item> p45 D &Pi; </>
<label> omit verse </>
  <item> &aleph;* 1247* </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Metzger p152-3 says that either the text with two participles
is redundant and caused shortening, or else the longer text is conflated.
Cf. Acts 27:7 <q lang=grc>GENESQAI KATA</q> is acceptably Lukan.
gB reading by homoioteleuton of 1 letter?  not strong likelihood.
Conflation is unlikely because the combination is clumsy, not smooth.
gB and D&plus;&Pi; are two ameliorations of gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:32, variant number 90 </head>
<label lang=grc> IDWN AUTON </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> IDWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L W	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Pronoun added to harmonize with verse 31 repeated.
Many pronouns used in this story.
A scribal leap from N to N is not a strong likelihood.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:33, variant number 91 </head>
<label lang=grc> IDWN AUTON </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> IDWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> Cs(mss) Cb(mss) </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Pronoun added to harmonize with verse 31 repeated.
Many pronouns used in this story.
Scribal leap from N to N not strong likelihood.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:35, variant number 92 </head>
<label lang=grc> AURION ECELQWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AURION </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AURION ECELQWN KAI </>
  <item> C* 60 349 954 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Homoioteleuton or homoioarchon both possible here.
Reading of C* and 60 suggests the neighboring participles gave some difficulty.
<q lang=grc> ECELQWN</q> helps make sense of the context,
but not required by the context.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:35, variant number 93 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIPEN AUTW </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph; </>
<label lang=grc> EIPEN </>
  <item> B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Right after <q lang=grc>PANDOXEI</q> the <q lang=grc>AUTW</q> seems superfluous.
See variant 23 for Birdsall's comment about
Koine using more pronouns than Attic.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:36, variant number 94 </head>
<label lang=grc> TIS OUN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> TIS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p><q lang=grc> OUN</q> seems needed for smooth reading and reduced assonance.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:37, variant number 95 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIPEN OUN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EIPEN DE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p><q lang=grc> OUN</q> seems a little more effective in summarizing.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:38, variant number 96 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGENETO DE EN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EN DE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Acc. to Fitzmyer p119, introductory
<q lang=grc>EGENETO</q>&plus;<q lang=grc>EN</q>&plus;infinitive is very Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:38, variant number 97 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI AUTOS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AUTOS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> D d syr diatess </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p><q lang=grc> KAI AUTOS</q> in this construction very Lukan,
according to Fitzmyer p120.
many MSS and correctors add <q lang=grc>O IHSOUS</q> after
<q lang=grc>EISELQEN</q>, in case the
referent of <q lang=grc>AUTOS</q> is unclear.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:39, variant number 98 </head>
<label lang=grc> PARAKAQISASA </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PARAKAQESQEISA </>
  <item> (&aleph;) B L A </>
<label lang=grc> PARAKAQHSASA </>
  <item> &Gamma; &Theta; &Omega; 047 0211 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Many other spellings also seen.
<q lang=grc> PARAKAQESQEIS</q>=1aor pass part, have seated oneself beside.
<q lang=grc> PARAKAQIZW</q>=sit down beside, in aor act part.
<q lang=grc> PARAKAQHMAI</q>=sit beside
The third form is least common, the other two are not rare.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:39, variant number 99 </head>
<label lang=grc> IHSOU </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; B*(NA26) </>
<label lang=grc> KURIOU </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 BC2(NA26) </>
<label lang=grc> KURIOU HMWN </>
  <item> Diatess Et(Bodl.40) </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Luke 7:13, 13:15, John 4:1, which are places
where <q lang=grc>KURIOS</q> was changed by D N &Theta; f1 f13 etc.
to <q lang=grc>IHSOUS</q>.
Narrator using <q lang=grc>KURIOS</q> of Jesus is very Lukan,
according to Bauer p459.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:41, variant number 100 </head>
<label lang=grc> IHSOUS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; BC B*(NA26) </>
<label lang=grc> KURIOS </>
  <item> &aleph; B* L 892 BC2(NA26) </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Luke 7:13, 13:15, John 4:1,
places where <q lang=grc>KURIOS</q> changed by D N &Theta; f1 f13 etc.
to <q lang=grc>IHSOUS</q>.
Narrator using <q lang=grc>KURIOS</q> of Jesus is very Lukan,
according to Bauer p459.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:41, variant number 101 </head>
<label lang=grc> TURBAZH </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> QORUBAZH </>
  <item> &aleph; B L W </>
<label lang=grc> TURBAZEI </>
  <item> &Gamma; &Lambda; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>According to Metzger, <q lang=grc>QORUBAZH</q> is a rare verb, corrected to
the more common <q lang=grc>TURBAZH</q>.
Based on the entries in Bauer and LSJM,
<q lang=grc>QORUBAZW</q> and related words
get five times the column space that <q lang=grc>TURBAZW</q> gets,
they being found several times in the NT, mostly in Mark and Acts.
Is <q lang=grc>QORUBAZW</q> Lukan, or just more common than
<q lang=grc>TURBAZW</q>?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:42, variant number 102 </head>
<label lang=grc> ENOS DE ESTIN XREIA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> OLIGWN DE ESTIN XREIA H ENOS </>
  <item> (&aleph;) (B) L </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> D e a b c d ff2 i l r1 Ss </>
<label lang=grc> OLIGWN DE ESTI XREIA </>
  <item> 38 Sj Ar </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Metzger says that <q lang=grc>ENOS</q> was taken as referring to
meal provisions only, softened to <q lang=grc>OLIGWN</q>,
and these two readings were combined/conflated
in gB "with disastrous results as to sense".
The omission of an incomprehensible passage by D might also
be due to a scribal leap from <q lang=grc>MARQA</q> to <q lang=grc>MARIA</q>.
For a dissenting opinion see:  Fee, G D, "One Thing is Needful? Luke 10:42",
New Testament Textual Criticism, its significance for exegesis:
Essays in Honour of Bruce M. Metzger, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1981.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:42, variant number 103 </head>
<label lang=grc> DE THN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> GAR THN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> THN </>
  <item> D it vg Ss </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Metzger says that the omission in D was connected to the loss of two
clauses for other reasons.
Is this conjunction variant related to the <q lang=grc>ENOS</q> variant?
<q lang=grc> GAR</q> chosen for variety after the preceding <q lang=grc>DE</q>?
<q lang=grc> GAR</q> a bit puzzling: how is Mary's choosing
an explanation for one thing being necessary?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 10:42, variant number 104 </head>
<label lang=grc> AP AUTHS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AUTHS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Homoioarchon from A to A not a strong consideration.
According to Bauer, <q lang=grc>AFAIRW TI APO TINOS</q>
is more usual syntax in Koine.
A bare genitive <q lang=grc>TINOS</q> occurs less commonly.
But in Attic usage (LS) bare genitive or accusative is always used,
never a preposition or dative.
gB is Atticized.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:01, variant number 105 </head>
<label lang=grc> MAQHTAS AUTOU </>
  <item> A W &Pi; (Y lacuna) 892 </>
<label lang=grc> MAQHTAS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Kilpatrick says that an identifying genitive after <q lang=grc>MAQHTAS</q>
was needed in the first century, Jesus not being the only person
with disciples, but later on the genitive was seen as redundant/superfluous.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:06, variant number 106 </head>
<label lang=grc> TO GRAMMA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> TA GRAMMATA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p><q lang=grc> GRAMMA[TA]</q> in verses 6 and 7 connected, but attestation of the
variants is not identical, R&plus;f1 differing at least.
What if Lukan original had differing numbers in these verses?
Attic and Koine both use <q lang=grc>GRAMMATA</q> usually,
infrequently <q lang=grc>GRAMMA</q>.
gB is possibly a correction to more common usage.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:07, variant number 107 </head>
<label lang=grc> TO GRAMMA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> TA GRAMMATA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>as in verse 6.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:09, variant number 108 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAGW </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> KAI EGW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p><q lang=grc> KAGW</q> form is Lukan, cf. 11:9, but much more in John.
There might be a concern that Jesus aligns himself with
the unjust by "<q lang=grc>KAGW</q>", but emphatic <q lang=grc>KAI EGW</q>
emphasizes his distinct teaching.
"Me too" is prominent meaning, but "I for my part" as in 11:9
is possible and Lukan.
<q lang=grc> KAI</q> as a conjunction is hard to understand in this context.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:09, variant number 109 </head>
<label lang=grc> POIHSATE EAUTOIS </>
  <item> A W Y &aleph;C 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EAUTOIS POIHSATE </>
  <item> &aleph;* B L </>
<label lang=grc> POIHSATE EAUTOUS </>
  <item> &Pi; H &Omega; </>
<label lang=grc> POIHSATE UMIN </>
  <item> 1215 1295 Chry </>
<label lang=grc> POIHSATE </>
  <item> 1220* Apoll </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. 12:33 which is similar to gA, but not synoptic parallel.
gA is both more Lukan and an easier reading.
gB order of words is ambiguous as to which verb
<q lang=grc>EAUTOIS</q> is attached to.
Placing it before its verb, first in the clause, is a bit strange,
more difficult.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:12, variant number 110 </head>
<label lang=grc> UMIN DWSEI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; B	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> DWSEI UMIN </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>gA matches parallel wording in v11.  Harmonization to context suspected.
Parallel form seems like better composition, expected.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:14, variant number 111 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI OI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> OI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Metzger says that the Pharisees were not mentioned since 15:2,
and <q lang=grc>KAI</q> was added to ameliorate the abrupt introduction
of Pharisees.
gB doesn't seem very abrupt.  <q lang=grc>KAI</q> slightly confusing as adverb or conjunction.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:16, variant number 112 </head>
<label lang=grc> EWS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> MEXRI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 11:12-13, a harmonization?
In Matt <q lang=grc>PROFHTAI</q>/<q lang=grc>NOMOS</q> reversed
and <q lang=grc>EPROFHTEUSAN</q> added.
In Luke, D&plus;&Theta;&plus;pc add <q lang=grc>EPROFHTEUSAN</q> by harmonization.
The phrase cries out for a verb, but few added one;
did many switch prepositions without a need, just to harmonize to Matt?  No.
Acc. to Bauer, <q lang=grc>EWS</q> as an improper preposition is more Lukan
and Koine.
<q lang=grc> MEXRIS</q> is a scribal improvement to a proper preposition.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:20, variant number 113 </head>
<label lang=grc> TIS HN ONOMATI LAZAROS OS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> TIS ONOMATI LAZAROS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Three main possibilities: <list type=ordered>
<item n=1> <q lang=grc>OS</q> omitted by haplography,
then <q lang=grc>HN</q> dropped to compensate,</item>
<item n=2> or <q lang=grc>OS</q> and <q lang=grc>HN</q> added to harmonize
to the not quite parallel context in v19.</item>
<item n=3> <q lang=grc>OS</q> and <q lang=grc>HN</q> omitted as clumsy/prolix.</item>
</list>
Balanced probabilities.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:20, variant number 114 </head>
<label lang=grc> HLKWMENOS </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EILKWMENOS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
<label lang=grc> EILKOMENOS </>
  <item> H &Lambda; 1009 </>
<label lang=grc> ELKOMENOS </>
  <item> 063 179 230 346 </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> Ss </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Bauer p251 says: see Bl.D. sec. 68, Rob. 364 on the reduplication.
gB spelling is given in Bauer for perf. pass. part.
Reading of 063 is "dragged", others "ulcerated".
Unless the grammars say something important is happening, call it spelling.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:21, variant number 115 </head>
<label lang=grc> APO TWN YIXIWN TWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> APO TWN </>
  <item> &aleph;* B L </>
<label lang=grc> APO TWN YIXWN TWN </>
  <item> D </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 15:27.  According to Metzger this phrase closely parallels
that from the Syrophoenician woman about dogs eating crumbs from the table,
so gA could be a harmonization to a similar phrase, but no synoptic parallel.
gB could very easily arise from a scribal leap.
This is the opinion of Burgon (p. B-19,20).
gA is also a harder reading.
In Matt we have <q lang=grc>KUNARIA ESQIEI APO TWN YIXIWN TWN PIPTONTWN</q>,
puppies eating some crumbs falling,
but here Lazarus was <q lang=grc>EPIQUMWN XORTASQHNAI</q>,
desiring to fill up, be satisfied by the little crumbs.
This incongruous image was ameliorated in D to read <q lang=grc>YIXWN</q>
instead of the diminutive <q lang=grc>YIXIWN</q>,
and likely ameliorated in gB by deleting
<q lang=grc> YIWIWN TWN</q>.
Any relation to 15:16??

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:21, variant number 116 </head>
<label lang=grc> APELEIXON </>
  <item> W(APELIKAN) Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EPELEIXON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L A </>
<label lang=grc> ELEIXON </>
  <item> D f1 vg </>
<label lang=grc> PERIELEIXON </>
  <item> 157 pc </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>These forms are in Bauer, but with short entries.
<q lang=grc> APOL-</q>. is lick or lick off or lick away.
<q lang=grc> EPIL-</q>. is lick (or lick on?).
<q lang=grc> PERIL-</q>. is lick around.
The context of dogs licking sores makes licking a sore off
seem medically impossible, the sores wouldn't go away.
Different copyists ameliorated <q lang=grc>APELEIXON</q>
with various forms of the verb.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:23, variant number 117 </head>
<label lang=grc> TON ABRAAM </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> ABRAAM </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Possibly add an article to avoid case ambiguity, so that Abraham
is not the subject of the sentence.
Most of the context has no article for the name Abraham.
Luke generally uses an article on Abraham to mark case more clearly.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:26, variant number 118 </head>
<label lang=grc> EPI PASI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EN PASI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p><q lang=grc> EPI</q> in the sense of "in addition to" makes perfect sense
in the context.
<q lang=grc> EN</q> is hard to understand, perhaps too hard to be anything but a blunder.
Could <q lang=grc>EN</q> mean "among all these problems"?  Yuk.
Fitzmyer p1133 refers to Sirach 48:15 and Job 12:9 claiming
that <q lang=grc>EN</q> there means "in addition".
I and the REB translators disagree.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 16:29, variant number 119 </head>
<label lang=grc> AYTW ABRAAM </>
  <item> A (W) Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ABRAAM </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Homoioarchon of one letter is unlikely.
The pronoun is superfluous and has no effect.
No reason to add or delete it but style.
See variant 23 for Birdsall's comment about
Koine using more pronouns than Attic.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:01, variant number 120 </head>
<label lang=grc> MAQHTAS </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> MAQHTAS AUTOU </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Homoioarchon of one letter is unlikely.
No synoptic parallels.
In Acts, <q lang=grc>MAQHTAI</q> usually without genitive, but in Luke and
the other gospels usage is mixed, mostly with a genitive.
Kilpatrick thought that mentioning "the disciples" without
specifying whose disciples they were was later, scribal usage,
because by then only Jesus' disciples were important.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:01, variant number 121 </head>
<label lang=grc> MH ELQEIN TA SKANDALA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> TA SKANDALA MH ELQEIN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 18:7 has order of gA, but context quite distant.
Synoptic harmonization unlikely.
What is the more usual place of the subject of an infinitive with article?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:01, variant number 122 </head>
<label lang=grc> OUAI DE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> PLHN OUAI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PLHN OUAI EKEINW </>
  <item> it(8x) Marcion </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 18:7 like gB, possible synoptic harmonization.
The reading of Marcion is even more harmonized.
<q lang=grc> PLHN</q> seems demanded by the context, an improvement,
but <q lang=grc>DE</q> works.
<q lang=grc> PLHN</q> quite Lukan (and Matthean), 19/31 of NT usages.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:02, variant number 123 </head>
<label lang=grc> MULOS ONIKOS </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> LIQOS MULIKOS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L* 892 </>
<label lang=grc> LIQOS ONIKOS </>
  <item> W 157 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 18:6 has <q lang=grc>MULOS ONIKOS</q>, like gA,
but context heavily paraphrased.
Cf. Mark 9:42, where gA and gB readings are reversed.  Something other than
synoptic harmonization seems to be afoot, here.
<q lang=grc> LIQOS ONIKOS</q> variant could not be a correction of
<q lang=grc>LIQOS MULIKOS</q>,
which is perfectly clear.
Perhaps <q lang=grc>MULOS ONIKOS</q> was a hard to understand
idiom, at least to non-millers who did not know what a "donkey millstone" was.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:02, variant number 124 </head>
<label lang=grc> ENA TWN MIKRWN TOUTWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph;C2 </>
<label lang=grc> TWN MIKRWN TOUTWN ENA </>
  <item> &aleph;* B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 18:6 and Mark 9:42, where verb and phrase match gA,
except for the additional <q lang=grc>TWN PISTEUONTWN</q>....
Synoptic harmonization possible.
gA order plainer, but gB may have moved the <q lang=grc>ENA</q> last
for emphasis.
If the transposition occurred as Colwell suggested transpositions often did,
something short was accidentally omitted, then restored later on
in the sentence when it was noticed.  This would make gB secondary.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:03, variant number 125 </head>
<label lang=grc> DE AMARTH </>
  <item> A W Y L </>
<label lang=grc> AMARTH </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 &Pi; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 18:15, where <q lang=grc>DE</q> is present,
but the sentence and paragraph structure
differs from that in Luke.  Small likelihood of synoptic harmonization.
<q lang=grc> DE</q> seems extraneous in the first of a series of clauses
structured as <q lang=grc>EAN... KAI EAN... KAI EAN</q>.
It also obscures the paragraph break
that is needed after <q lang=grc>PROSEXETE EAUTOIS</q>.
Polished by deleting <q lang=grc>DE</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:04, variant number 126 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI EPTAKIS THS HMERAS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> KAI EPTAKIS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>No relevant synoptic parallel.
Homoioteleuton of one letter not too likely.
Repeated <q lang=grc>THS HMERAS</q> seems prolix.
Harmonization to context of preceding <q lang=grc>EPTAKIS THS HMERAS</q>
is most likely.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:04, variant number 127 </head>
<label lang=grc> EPISTREYH </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EPISTREYH PROS SE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
<label lang=grc> EPISTREYH EPI SE </>
  <item> f1	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 18:15, which has <q lang=grc>AMARTHSH [EIS SE]</q>,
shortened by gB there.
The several prepositions suggest that synoptic harmonization is not happening.
<q lang=grc> EPISTREFW</q> normally takes <q lang=grc>EIS</q>
or <q lang=grc>PROS</q> or <q lang=grc>EPI</q> for the destination,
but occasionally an adverb or just an implied destination.
In the context of repentance, bare <q lang=grc>EPISTREYH</q> is ambiguous,
meaning either turning to God or turning to apologize to the brother.
Then gB and f1 are two different attempts to clarify the verb.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:05, variant number 128 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIPON </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EIPAN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>gA has better Attic spelling, but neither uncommon.
No relevant parallel.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:07, variant number 129 </head>
<label lang=grc> EREI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EREI AUTW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>No relevant parallel.
<q lang=grc> AUTW</q> desired to clarify the ambiguity of who
is the subject of <q lang=grc>EREI</q>: <q lang=grc>TIS</q>,
the master or <q lang=grc>OS</q>, the slave?
This can be figured out eventually as one reads along,
but it presents a superficial difficulty.
Also, see variant 23 for Birdsall's comment about
Koine using more pronouns than Attic.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:08, variant number 130 </head>
<label lang=grc> EWS AN </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; L </>
<label lang=grc> EWS </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 W	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>No relevant parallel.
<q lang=grc> FAGW</q> and <q lang=grc>PIW</q> being aorist subjunctive,
the grammar rule mentioned
in Bauer under <q lang=grc>EWS</q> (with listed exceptions)
would require <q lang=grc>EWS AN</q>.
gA is a grammar improvement.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:09, variant number 131 </head>
<label lang=grc> XARIN EXEI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EXEI XARIN </>
  <item> &aleph; B LC 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EXEIN XARIN </>
  <item> L* </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>The more natural order of words would possibly associate
<q lang=grc>TW DOULW</q>
more closely to <q lang=grc>XARIN</q> than <q lang=grc>EXEI</q>,
but no big difference is visible.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:09, variant number 132 </head>
<label lang=grc> TW DOULW EKEINW </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> TW DOULW </>
  <item> &aleph;C B L 892* A </>
<label> omit </>
  <item> &aleph;* </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Homoioteleuton of one letter not strongly likely.
<q lang=grc> EKEINW</q> might seem superfluous since no other slave is involved.
&aleph;* did not even need to mention the slave at all.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:09, variant number 133 </head>
<label lang=grc> DIATAXQENTA OU DOKW </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> DIATAXQENTA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> DIATAXQENTA AUTW </>
  <item> X a Ss Sc Cs Cb Cyprian </>
<label lang=grc> DIATAXQENTA AUTW OU DOKW </>
  <item> D f13 it Diatessaron </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Metzger on p166 saw no reason to delete <q lang=grc>OU DOKW</q>,
and he said that
the words seem to be a marginal comment slunk into the Western text.
Jesus' question <q lang=grc>MH EXEI</q> is just rhetorical, no answer needed.  Why make a
dull-witted comment in the margin?
gB and the coptic seem to have suffered a scribal leap
from <q lang=grc>OU</q> to <q lang=grc>OUTWS</q>.
<q lang=grc> DIATAXQENTA</q> does call out for a dative object, and it was added in the Westerns.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:10, variant number 134 </head>
<label lang=grc> LEGETE </>
  <item> A W &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> LEGETE OTI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 Y	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>No relevant parallel.
Nothing distinct to observe, except that this variant may relate
to the next one.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:10, variant number 135 </head>
<label lang=grc> OTI O </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> O </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 A </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Homoioteleuton of one letter not too likely.
This second <q lang=grc>OTI</q> is problematic, because if it is recitative,
it is superfluous, since the quotation started back at <q lang=grc>DOULOI</q>,
while if it means "because", it implies the slave was unworthy
<emph>because</> of his obedience, not in spite of his obedience.
In either case it invited deletion.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:11, variant number 136 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTON EIS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EIS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Luke 9:51, 13:22 similar but not parallel.
The gA reading is a classic example of the Lukanisms described in
Fitzmyer pp 118-121, although the presence of the pronoun subject
is not explicitly described as part of the syndrome.
Still the examples look like gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:11, variant number 137 </head>
<label lang=grc> DIA MESOU </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> DIA MESON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> ANA MESON </>
  <item> f1 f13 Tit </>
<label lang=grc> MESON </>
  <item> D </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Luke 9:52, John 4:4 no relevant match.
See Bauer p507 for <q lang=grc>DIA</q> and Lukan usage of <q lang=grc>MESOS</q>.
Luke often says <q lang=grc>EN MESW</q>.
gA reading is normal usage in Koine, OK in Attic.
gB reading is rare, but a little more common in Attic than Koine.
<q lang=grc> DIA MESON</q> may have a problem in suggesting a trip through
Samaria and Galilee in the wrong order from north to south.
Correction to common usage more likely here than Atticistic correction.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:12, variant number 138 </head>
<label lang=grc> APHNTHSAN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; B	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> YPHNTNSAN </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Bauer says these are two near synonyms which are often interchanged
by manuscripts,
and he lists examples where gA usually had <q lang=grc>APANTAW</q>
and gB usually had <q lang=grc>UPANTAW</q>.
Both mean "meet", but <q lang=grc>APANTAW</q> could also
mean "happen to" in other contexts.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:21, variant number 139 </head>
<label lang=grc> IDOU EKEI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EKEI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Mark 13:21 has <q lang=grc>IDOU</q> (<q lang=grc>IDE</q>) twice.
Cf. Luke 17:23 very complex variants, but <q lang=grc>IDOU</q> repeated.
Harmonized to Mark or v23.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:24, variant number 140 </head>
<label lang=grc> H ASTRAPTOUSA </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ASTRAPTOUSA </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 24:27, has no participle.
After <q lang=grc>ASTRAPH</q> haplography or dittography possible.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:27, variant number 141 </head>
<label lang=grc> ECEGAMIZONTO </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EGAMIZONTO </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 24:38 has participles not finite verbs,
but gB has no <q lang=grc>EK-</q> prefix there.
See Bauer p238.  The forms with or without <q lang=grc>EK-</q>
and with an <q lang=grc>-IZ-</q> or <q lang=grc>-ISK-</q>
suffix vary between the manuscripts in all locations where they occur.
<q lang=grc> GAMIZW</q> is preferred by Alexandrian witnesses,
<q lang=grc>EKGAMIZW</q> by the Byzantines.
Both are present in Attic and uncommon in Koine outside the NT.  A stylistic or
dialectal choice.
Luke likes preposition prefixes on verbs.
Many verbs in the neighborhood start with E.  This repetition of augments
makes a scribal leap which omits <q lang=grc>EC-</q> not unreasonable.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:27, variant number 142 </head>
<label lang=grc> APANTAS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph; </>
<label lang=grc> PANTAS </>
  <item> B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Gen 7:21-23 and Matt 24:39, no relevant match.
<q lang=grc> APAS</q> is very Lukan as an alternative to <q lang=grc>PAS</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:28, variant number 143 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI WS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> KAQWS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> WS </>
  <item> it(8x) vg </>
<label lang=grc> KAI KAQWS </>
  <item> Eus </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Gen 18:20-22 no match.
Cf. Matt 24:38-39 different wording.
Fitzmyer says <q lang=grc>KAQWS</q> is a word favored by Luke.
A random scribal blunder is likely here.
<q lang=grc> KAI</q> is often associated in use with <q lang=grc>OMOIWS</q>.
Bauer p391 says Phrynicus strongly opposed the use of <q lang=grc>KAQWS</q>.
Did that mean fastidious Atticist scribes corrected <q lang=grc>KAQWS</q>?
Perhaps, but not so likely to <q lang=grc>KAI WS</q> as to <q lang=grc>WS</q>.
Harmonization to the context of v26 could produce gB, but
especially the reading of Eus.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:29, variant number 144 </head>
<label lang=grc> QEION KAI PUR </>
  <item> A W &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> PUR KAI QEION </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 Y	Maj(NA) TR </>
<label lang=grc> PUR </>
  <item> 475* Sc Eus IR </>
<label lang=grc> PUR QEION </>
  <item> 1005 1365 2372 </>
<label lang=grc> QEION PUR </>
  <item> 1012 1630 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Gen 19:24 ff. matches gA order, but match is loose in other respects.
The gB order is well known from many usages in the Apocalypse,
from which we get the English fixed phrase "fire and brimstone".

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:29, variant number 145 </head>
<label lang=grc> APWLESEN APANTAS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph; </>
<label lang=grc> APWLESEN PANTAS </>
  <item> B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Gen 19:24-25 no match for wording.
Cf. vs. 27 is a refrain.
Cf. Matt 24:39 no match for Lot.
Citations in Bauer show <q lang=grc>APAS</q> is Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:31, variant number 146 </head>
<label lang=grc> TW AGRW </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> AGRW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 24:18 matches gA.
Cf. Mark 13:16 <q lang=grc>O EIS TON AGRON [WN]</q>.
Harmonization to synoptic parallels and to immediate context likely.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:33, variant number 147 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI OS EAN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> OS D AN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> OS EAN </>
  <item> 2096 </>
<label lang=grc> OSA AN </>
  <item> 579 </>
<label lang=grc> OS GAR AN </>
  <item> Lvt(l) </>
<label lang=grc> KAI OS AN </>
  <item> D 063 </>
<label lang=grc> KAI OS D AN </>
  <item> 13 543 2096 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 10:39 and John 12:25 no close match.
Cf. Matt 16:25 <q lang=grc>OS D AN</q>
Cf. Mark 8:35 <q lang=grc>OS D AN</q>
Cf. Luke 9:24 <q lang=grc>OS D AN</q>
Synoptic harmonization likely.
The contrasts drawn in v23 make <q lang=grc>DE</q> seem more appropriate
than <q lang=grc>KAI</q>,
while <q lang=grc>KAI</q> has a rougher KOINE flavor here.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:33, variant number 148 </head>
<label lang=grc> AUTHN ZWOGONHSEI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; L </>
<label lang=grc> ZWOGONHSEI </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 </>
<label lang=grc> THN YUXHN AUTOU ZWOGONHSEI </>
  <item> f13 syr </>
<label lang=grc> AUTHN ENEKEN EMOU ZWOGONHSEI </>
  <item> &Lambda; f1216 Go </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. John 12:25 not relevant.
Cf. Matt 10:39, Matt 16:25, Mark 8:35, Luke 9:24 like f13 or Go or both.
gA/gB did not seem to harmonize to a parallel.
Lack of an object in gA seems like a hard reading which was
ameliorated by the various objects introduced.
The overabundance of <q lang=grc>AUTHN</q> usage in the verse
may have displeased a copyist who omitted an unnecessary instance.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:34, variant number 149 </head>
<label lang=grc> DUO ESONTAI </>
  <item> A W &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ESONTAI DUO </>
  <item> &aleph; B L Y	TR </>
<label lang=grc> DUO <foreign lang=lat>post</> MIAS </>
  <item> D 1215 1351 d </>
<label lang=grc> ESONTAI </>
  <item> 892 </>
<label lang=grc> DUO EUREQHSONTAI </>
  <item> Thdt </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 24:40 phrase like gA, but context varies widely.
Cf. verse 35 matches gB, and is in the immediate context.
The reading that would explain the others is D&plus;1215,
where the unusual placement of <q lang=grc>DUO</q> would be regularized
in different ways by gA and gB.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:34, variant number 150 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; L </>
<label lang=grc> O EIS </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 24:40 with <q lang=grc>O EIS... KAI O EIS</q> in gA,
<q lang=grc>EIS... KAI EIS</q> in gB.
Harmonization to Matt was not happening.
gB seems to have harmonized to the <q lang=grc>O ETEROS</q> in the same verse.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:35, variant number 151 </head>
<label lang=grc> DUO ESONTAI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> ESONTAI DUO </>
  <item> &aleph;C B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> KAI DUO ESONTAI </>
  <item> Ar Et AU HI MAX </>
<label lang=grc> DUO </>
  <item> 2487 2757 Lvt(6x) Bas </>
<label> omit verse </>
  <item> &aleph;* 123 1352 Dtp </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. verse 34 split similarly.  Might have caused harmonization here.
Cf. Matt 24:40 <q lang=grc>DUO ALHQOUSAI</q>.
Reading of 2487 may be harmonization to Matt or homoioteleuton.
If 2487 were original, that explains how <q lang=grc>ESONTAI</q> was added
in more than one location.
A homoioteleuton deleting <q lang=grc>ESONTAI</q> before <q lang=grc>DUO</q>,
which was caught immediately by the scribe,
might be corrected so as to produce gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:35, variant number 152 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI H ETERA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> H DE ETERA </>
  <item> &aleph;C1 B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> H ETERA </>
  <item> 1241 </>
<label lang=grc> KAI ETERA </>
  <item> 028 063 </>
<label lang=grc> KAI O ETEROS </>
  <item> 579 1216 1338 AM </>
<label lang=grc> KAI MIA </>
  <item> 179 2487 Ss Sc </>
<label lang=grc> KAI ALLH </>
  <item> Lvt(4x) Lvg(1 ms) HI </>
<label>
omit verse by hom
</label><item>
	&aleph;* pc
</item></list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Matt 24:41 no <q lang=grc>ETERA</q> to match.
gA matches the structure of verse 34, except for gender,
and could be a result of harmonization to immediate context.
The <q lang=grc>DE</q> form for this contrast-drawing would be better Greek,
and might be a scribal improvement.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 17:36, variant number 153 </head>
<label lang=grc> EKEI SUNAXQHSONTAI OI AETOI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EKEI KAI OI AETOI EPISUNAXQHSONTAI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EKEI OI AETOI SUNAXQHSONTAI </>
  <item> f13 Ar Gg </>
<label lang=grc> EKEI EPISUNAXQHSONTAI OI AETOI </>
  <item> 7 Lect </>
<label lang=grc> EKEI SUNAXQHSONTAI KAI OI AETOI </>
  <item> U 2 Bas Eus Kr </>
<label lang=grc> EKEI KAI OI AETOI SUNAXQHSONTAI </>
  <item> 69 579 1346 </>
<label lang=grc> EKEI KAI OI AETOI </>
  <item> &Lambda; </>
</list>
<!-- Does Q read with A, B, or 7 here? -->

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Adding <q lang=grc>KAI</q> seems like an easy enhancement called
for by <q lang=grc>OPOU...EKEI</q>.
This seems to have happened in U 2, if derived from gA, and in
69 1346, if derived from their relatives, f13.

<p>Cf. Matt 24:28, a verbal parallel from a different historical circumstance,
which reads like gA.
Tischendorf and Swanson list a variant in this clause in Matthew where
<q lang=grc>KAI</> is added before <q lang=grc>OI</>
by 565, 1424, and eight or more other miniscules,
Lvt(l), Lvg(ed), Hipp(anti), Chr, and Ir(int).
This also suggests that <q lang=grc>KAI</> was easy to add.

<p>Burgon says that <q lang=grc>EKEI KAI</q> is dittography
for <q lang=grc>EKEI</q>.
I think deletion by parablepsis is more likely than dittography,
seeing that <q lang=grc>KAI</q> is not a duplicate of <q lang=grc>KEI</q>.
And stylistic variation is even more likely.

The readings of f13, 7, et al, if derived from gA, which seems plausible,
supply evidence that some scribes wanted to transpose <q lang=grc>OI AETOI</>
earlier in the clause and wanted to add the <q lang=grc>EPI</q> prefix
for stylistic reasons.

<p>Luke likes prefixed verbs, such as gB has here.
<p>??Make the preference be none??

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:01, variant number 154 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI PARABOLHN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> PARABOLHN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>cf. 18:9 variation.
Plummer says <q lang=grc>DE KAI</q> is Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:04, variant number 155 </head>
<label lang=grc> DE TAUTA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph;	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> TAUTA DE </>
  <item> B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> TAUTA </>
  <item> b c d L Dtp Cs(1ms) </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The <q lang=grc>DE</q> in third position makes gB seem like
a really hard reading,
but why do NA26 and several other editions read with gA?
Is gB too hard, i.e. impossible?  No comprendo.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:04, variant number 156 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI ANQRWPON OUK </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> OUDE ANQRWPON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>gA is harmonization to immediate context of preceding clause.
Is <q lang=grc>KAI OU... KAI OU</q> a permissible Greek both...and structure?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:07, variant number 157 </head>
<label lang=grc> POIHSEI </>
  <item> A W Y L </>
<label lang=grc> POIHSH </>
  <item> &aleph; B 892 &Pi; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>See Bauer p517 under <q lang=grc>ME</q> for the usage of <q lang=grc>OU MH</q>,
after which the subjunctive is expected.
Essentially all the verses listed by Bauer reading
<q lang=grc> OU MH</q> &plus; fut. ind. had variant readings, with the Alexandrians
reading fut. ind. and the Byzantines aor. subj.
Many uncontested readings had the subjunctive.
gB is a grammatical improvement of gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:07, variant number 158 </head>
<label lang=grc> BOWNTWN PROS AUTON </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> BOWNTWN AYTW </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> BOWNTWN AUTWN </>
  <item> D </>
<label lang=grc> BOWNTWN </>
  <item> L1761 Lvt(7x) AMst </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p><q lang=grc> BOAW PROS AUTON</q> is very Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:09, variant number 159 </head>
<label lang=grc> DE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> DE KAI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Plummer says <q lang=grc>DE KAI</q> is very Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:11, variant number 160 </head>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS PROS EAUTON TAUTA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi;	NA26 </>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS TAUTA PROS EAUTON </>
  <item> &aleph;C2 B (L AUTON) 892 </>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS TAUTA </>
  <item> &aleph;* 828C L1761 Cs Gg </>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS </>
  <item> 828* 1071 RUF </>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS OUTWS </>
  <item> Lvt(8x) </>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS KAQ EAUTON TAUTA </>
  <item> D 2542 </>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS PROS EAUTON OUTWS </>
  <item> Dta Dtp </>
<label lang=grc> STAQEIS PROS EAUTON </>
  <item> Ss </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Metzger p168 says that the gA reading is harder and
D is an amelioration;  <q lang=grc>STAQEIS PROS EAUTON</q> was hard to construe,
so <q lang=grc>PROS EAUTON</q> was altered or omitted or moved
in various ways to relieve the problem.
&aleph;* could also arise from a scribal leap from <q lang=grc>PROSE</q>
to <q lang=grc>PROSE</q>.
From examples in Bauer <q lang=grc>STAQEIS PROS EAUTON</q> seems acceptable
as a Lukan usage, though not distinctively Lukan.
Comfort (p 141), agrees gA is most difficult but prefers gB
on the basis of external attestation and <q rend=quoted>clearer expression</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:13, variant number 161 </head>
<label lang=grc> KAI O TELWNES </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> O DE TELWNES </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Bauer says <q lang=grc>KAI</q> used much more in Koine than Attic.
This context, which is adversative, makes <q lang=grc>DE</q>
a better, more refined, conjunction than <q lang=grc>KAI</q>.
gB is a refinement on gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:13, variant number 162 </head>
<label lang=grc> EIS TON OURANON EPARAI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EPARAI EIS TON OURANON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EPARAI </>
  <item> 047 i l </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>stylistic variation.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:13, variant number 163 </head>
<label lang=grc> ETUPTEN EIS </>
  <item> A W Y </>
<label lang=grc> ETUPTEN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 &Pi; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p><q lang=grc> TUPTW</q> in the NT always takes the accusative,
except once in Matthew,
and possibly here, where <q lang=grc>TYPTW EIS</q> occurs.
gB is a correction towards more common usage.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:14, variant number 164 </head>
<label lang=grc> H GAR EKEINOS </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PAR EKEINON </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> H EKEINOS </>
  <item> W Chry1/2 &Theta;	TR </>
<label lang=grc> HPER EKEINOS </>
  <item> 157 Bas Chry1/2 </>
<label lang=grc> PAR EKEINON TON FARISAION </>
  <item> D a d Sp Dta </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Perhaps even preference gA.
Bauer suggests <q lang=grc>H PAR</q> became <q lang=grc>H GAR</q>,
but the former is not attested.
<q lang=grc>H GAR</q> is hard to parse and understand in this clause.
The readings of W and 157 make this text easier,
gB may also be a clarification of <q lang=grc>H GAR</q>
or <q lang=grc>H PAR</q>.

<p>Ref. Burgon p. A-96. A conjectural emendation to a hard reading??
<p>
Cortes in [Cor] presents the following....??from the article...
<q lang=grc>H GAR EKEINOS</q> is much more difficult than
<q lang=grc>PAR EKEINON</q>,
because <q lang=grc>H</q> can be ...?, comparative, or negative exclusive,
but not explanatory.
<q lang=grc>H GAR</q> not found in the NT elsewhere.
A comparative <q lang=grc>H</q> after an adjective in the positive degree
is a LXXism, appropriate to Luke's habits.
<q lang=grc>P</q> and <q lang=grc>G</q> can be visually confounded,
but this does not explain the introduction of
<q lang=grc>H</q> before <q lang=grc>GAR</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:15, variant number 165 </head>
<label lang=grc> EPETIMHSAN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; BC </>
<label lang=grc> EPETIMWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B* L 892 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 19:13 <q lang=grc>EPETIMHSAN</q>, but without <q lang=grc>IDONTES</q>.
Cf. Mark 10:13 <q lang=grc>EPETIMWN</q> Byzantine,
<q lang=grc>EPETIMHSAN</q> Alexandrian.
The variation in Mark suggests something other than synoptic
harmonization could be having an effect.
An imperfect tense here could be harmonizing to <q lang=grc>PROSEFERON</q>,
but the aorist might come from the influence of <q lang=grc>IDONTES</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:16, variant number 166 </head>
<label lang=grc> PROSKALESAMENOS AUTA EIPEN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> PROSKALESATO AUTA LEGWN </>
  <item> &aleph; (B omit AUTA) L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PROSEKALEITO AUTA LEGWN </>
  <item> D G f1 </>
<label lang=grc> AUTA EIPEN </>
  <item> Ss Sc </>
<label lang=grc> PROSKALESAMENOS AUTA ELEGEN </>
  <item> 13 69C </>
<label lang=grc> PROSKALESAMENOS AUTA LEGEI </>
  <item> 69* 157 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Matt 19:14 no match, except uses <q lang=grc>EIPEN</q>.
Cf. Mark 10:14 no match, except uses <q lang=grc>EIPEN</q>.
Examples of <q lang=grc>PROSKALEW</q> in Bauer, including Lukan, are
mostly circumstantial participles.
gA looks like a conformation to more common usage.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:17, variant number 167 </head>
<label lang=grc> EAN </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> AN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 W </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Mark 10:15 same split in the matching clause.
Bauer says the manuscripts vary greatly between
<q lang=grc> EAN</q> and <q lang=grc>AN</q> after relative pronouns.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:22, variant number 168 </head>
<label lang=grc> DE TAUTA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> DE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> DE AUTA </>
  <item> 1542 </>
<label lang=grc> DE AUTOU </>
  <item> 157 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 19:21 and Mark 10:21, no match.
Is there an identifiable Lukan usage preference for such
introductory formulas with <q lang=grc>AKOUSAS</q>?

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:22, variant number 169 </head>
<label lang=grc> EN OURANW </>
  <item> W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> EN OURANOIS </>
  <item> &aleph; L 892 A </>
<label lang=grc> EN TOIS OURANOIS </>
  <item> B D	[NA26] </>
<label lang=grc> EN OURANON </>
  <item> 1319 </>
<label lang=grc> EC OURANOU </>
  <item> 1604 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The variant is unmentioned in NA26.
<p>Cf. Matt 19:21 parallel split of Byzantine/Alexandrian,
but not involving precisely the same manuscripts.
Cf. Mark 10:21 <q lang=grc>EN OURANW</q>.
Cf. Matt 6:20, a distant parallel, <q lang=grc>QESAUROUS EN OURANW</q>.
gA might have harmonized to Matt or Mark.
Lukan usage is elsewhere never <q lang=grc>EN OURANOIS</q>,
but outside Luke&plus;Acts&plus;Apocalypse the NT much prefers the plural.
gB might have conformed the phrase to common usage.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:23, variant number 170 </head>
<label lang=grc> EGENETO </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EGENHQH </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Matt 19:22 and Mark 10:22, no match.
<q lang=grc> EGENHQH</q> is not pure Attic, according to Goodwin and little Liddel.
<q lang=grc> EGENETO</q> is more common and approved.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:24, variant number 171 </head>
<label lang=grc> O IHSOUS PERILUPON GENOMENON EIPE </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892	[NA26] </>
<label lang=grc> O IHSOUS EIPE </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
<label lang=grc> O IHSOUS PERILOIPON GENOMENON EIPE </>
  <item> K min(3x) </>
<label lang=grc> O IHSOUS PERILEIPON GENOMENON EIPE </>
  <item> L950 </>
<label lang=grc> PERILUPON GENOMENON EIPE O IHSOUS </>
  <item> D Lvt(7x) </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 19:23 and Mark 10:23, no match.
Metzger p168-9 says that <q lang=grc>PERILUPON GENOMENON</q>
is placed variously,
perhaps introduced from verse 23, and that Luke often repeats a
word in adjacent passages.
The IGNTP apparatus shows that <q lang=grc>O IHSOUS</q>
and <q lang=grc>AUTON</q> are placed variously,
but not <q lang=grc>PERILUPON GENOMENON</q>.
Perhaps scribes were bothered/confused by the interleaved order of
<q lang=grc> IDWN... AUTON... IHSOUS PERILUPON</q> and attempted
to clarify/alleviate it by moving or deleting one element or the other.
The idea that P.G. was introduced from v23 is little more than a supposition,
not an explanation.  Why introduce it?
The readings of K and L950 are likely to be itacisms.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:25, variant number 172 </head>
<label lang=grc> RAFIDOS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> BELONHS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Matt 19:24 <q lang=grc>TRUPHMATOS/TRUMALIAS/TRHMATOS RAFIDOS</q>
Cf. Mark 10:25 <q lang=grc>TRUMALIAS/(TRUPHMATOS)/(TRHMATOS) [THS] RAFIDOS/(BELONHS)</q>
Synoptic harmonization in gA quite possible.
Fitzmyer p1205 says that <q lang=grc>BELONHS</q> is particularly Attic.
Elliott p133 says that the neo-Atticist grammarian Phrynicus,
of the second century, recommended the classical <mentioned lang=grc>BELONH</>
as preferable to <mentioned lang=grc>RAFIS</>.
Elliott concludes that the <mentioned lang=grc>BELONH</> variant
reading in both Mark and Luke should be rejected as a stylistic alteration,
and he goes on: <q rend=quoted>This conclusion is reinforced when we
consider that the only other occurrence of <mentioned lang=grc>RAFIS</>
in the New Testament is at Matt 19:24, which is without variant,
thus showing that this is the normal Koine word used by the
New Testament authors.  There is no firm example of
<mentioned lang=grc>BELONH</> in the New Testament.</q>
(Perhaps change preference to none??)


<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:27, variant number 173 </head>
<label lang=grc> ESTI PARA TW QEW </>
  <item> A Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> PARA TW QEW ESTI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> PARA QEW ESTI </>
  <item> W D 157 </>
<label lang=grc> ESTI PARA QEW </>
  <item> P &Omega; </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 19:26 no verb. no close match.
Cf. Mark 10:27 Alexandrians have no <q lang=grc>ESTI</q>,
Byzantines do as gA in Luke.
Cf. Job 42:12 no match.
gB may harmonize to the immediate context:
<q lang=grc>ADUNATA PARA... DUNATA PARA....</q>
gA may be synoptic harmonization.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:28, variant number 174 </head>
<label lang=grc> PETROS </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> O PETROS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892	TR </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA?
<p>Cf. Matt 19:27 <q lang=grc>APOKRIQEIS O PETROS EIPEN</q>
Cf. Mark 10:28 <q lang=grc>HRCATO O PETROS LEGEIN</q>
Both Matt and Mark use the article.
Peter not previously mentioned by name, only as <q lang=grc>OI AKOUSANTES</q>.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:28, variant number 175 </head>
<label lang=grc> AFHKAMEN PANTA KAI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; &aleph;* </>
<label lang=grc> AFENTES TA IDIA </>
  <item> &aleph;C B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> TA IDIA AFENTES </>
  <item> D 2542 </>
<label lang=grc> PANTA TA IDIA AFENTES </>
  <item> f1 </>
<label lang=grc> AFENTES PANTA TA IDIA KAI </>
  <item> &Theta; f13 syr </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>Cf. Matt 19:27 as gA.
Cf. Mark 10:28 as gA.
&Theta; looks like a conflation.  Perhaps also f1.
Nine manuscripts harmonized to a synoptic by
adding <q lang=grc>TI ARA ESTAI HMIN</q> here.
It is quite possible gA is another synoptic harmonization.
The tense difference between <q lang=grc>AFHKAMEN</q> and
<q lang=grc>HKOLOUQHSAMEN</q> was smoothed
out by some witnesses in Mark, and by uncial R in Luke, so there was a
perceived problem for some copyists.
Bauer says that the use of <q lang=grc>KAI</q>
to coordinate clauses when more refined usage would subordinate one
as a participle is colloquial/Koine.  gB appear to be a grammatical
refinement of gA.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:29, variant number 176 </head>
<label lang=grc> GONEIS H ADELFOUS H GUNAIKA </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> GUNAIKA H ADELFOUS H GONEIS </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> GONEIS H ADELFOUS H ADELFAS H GUNAIKA </>
  <item> D X &Psi; &Delta; </>
<label lang=grc> ADELFOUS H ADELFAS H GONEIS </>
  <item> 1241 </>
<label lang=grc> ADELFOUS H GONEIS H GUNAIKA </>
  <item> 131 </>
</list>

<p>Preference: none
<p>The manuscripts present more variants similar to the above.
Cf. Matt 19:29 and Mark 10:29-30, similar lists with synonyms substituted
and in a different order.  Neither gA nor gB are synoptic harmonizations,
although several of the minor variants are.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:30, variant number 177 </head>
<label lang=grc> OS OU </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> OS OUXI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> KAI OU </>
  <item> Q 16 1338 Sp </>
<label lang=grc> OS </>
  <item> 161 174 </>
<label lang=grc> OS EAN </>
  <item> Lvt(5x) Ar </>
<label lang=grc> EAN </>
  <item> D d </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB?
<p>Cf. Matt 19:29 no match.
Cf. Mark 10:30 <q lang=grc>EAN MH</q>.
No synoptic harmonization in gA or gB.
<q lang=grc> OUXI MH</q> is unusual, <q lang=grc>OU MH</q> common.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:35, variant number 178 </head>
<label lang=grc> PROSAITWN </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EPAITWN </>
  <item> &aleph; B L </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gB
<p>Cf. Matt 20:30, where there is no similar verb.
<p>Cf. Mark 10:46 <q lang=grc>PROSAITWN</q>, where the word order is different.
NA26 says gA is due to the synoptic parallel.
<q lang=grc> PROSAITWN</q> is the common and Attic word,
<q lang=grc>EPAITWN</q> less common.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
<p><list type=gloss><head> Luke 18:41, variant number 179 </head>
<label lang=grc> LEGWN TI </>
  <item> A W Y &Pi; </>
<label lang=grc> TI </>
  <item> &aleph; B L 892 </>
<label lang=grc> EIPWN TI </>
  <item> Orig </>
<label lang=grc> LEGWN AUTW TI </>
  <item> Ss Sc Gg </>
</list>

<p>Preference: gA
<p>Cf. Matt 20:32 <q lang=grc>EFWNHSEN AUTOUS KAI EIPE</q>.
<p>Cf. Mark 10:51 <q lang=grc>APOKRIQEIS LEGEI</q>.
<p>No synoptic harmonization here.
The extra <q lang=grc>LEGWN</q> after <q lang=grc>EPHRWTHSEN</q>
is superfluous, a semitism/LXXism, and so is Lukan.

<!-- ==================================================================== -->
</div>
<div type=section><head> Overall Results </>

<p>
Here are the counts of readings falling into the
five categories discussed above, out of a total of 179.
<list type=gloss>
<label>36</><item>definitely favoring gA</>
<label>33</><item>slightly favoring gA</>
<label>63</><item>favoring neither</>
<label>28</><item>slightly favoring gB</>
<label>19</><item>definitely favoring gB</>
</list>

<p>
Depending on how much weight is given to the "slightly" category,
The score for gA varies from 36 to 69 and for gB from 19 to 47.
Such an election result, which mildly favors the Byzantines instead
of giving a landslide victory to the Alexandrians, is a hefty
nonconfirmation of Hort's claims.  Something is definitely wrong:
either in the current consensus, or in my analysis of the readings.

<p>
If you don't like these results, the way to contest them would
be to advance arguments regarding the internal evidence found
in many of the readings discussed below, and convince me and others
that a good number of the verdicts should be modified or reversed.
Remember to avoid the shorter reading prejudice which tends
to soak into one's bones.  Such reversals of verdicts will
surely happen in a few cases, but probably not in many cases.
An argument that the variants analyzed below are not representative
of the text type issue would be a surprise to me.

<p>
One way not to contest these results would be to say:  We just KNOW
that the Byzantines are a late development, so don't try to confuse
me with internal evidences!

<p>
The wide difference between my results in this paper and the results
published by Hort are possibly due to three main causes.

<p>
<list type=ordered>
<item n=1> The inapplicability of the <term lang=lat>lectio brevior</>
canon to the early
transmission of the New Testament text was not demonstrated until
pre-fourth-century manuscript evidence was available, something that
had to wait for the twentieth century.
It has long been noticed that the readings of the Alexandrian witnesses 
tend to be shorter than those of the Byzantines.
</item>

<item n=2> The modern understanding of the difference between the Attic and Koine
dialects of Greek came about after the famous papyri finds of the turn
of the century and afterward in Egypt.  These provided a corpus of Koine
texts which forms a background context for understanding the NT and its
language.  Hort was raised on classical Attic Greek.
</item>

<item n=3> Because of the meager attestation of the earliest forms of
the Byzantine text type, Hort's opinion about the "Syrian" witnesses
was probably focused mostly on the late medieval Syrian witnesses,
not on a fourth century form of the text.
</item></list>

<p>
The significance of the <term lang=lat>lectio brevior</>
issue can be quantified in the framework of this study
by reevaluating the readings so as to favor short ones.
If <term lang=lat>lectio brevior</>
were made supreme over all other considerations,
so that any reading with fewer words and fewer letters was automatically
favored, then our scoreboard of 36/33/63/28/19 (from gA to gB)
would as a result become 31/15/42/17/74, a landslide victory for gB.
<p>
To be specific, the preference would shift from gA to gB in variants
1, 23, 24, 31, 66, 85, 89, 92, 96, 97, 104, 105, 115, 133, 158, 164, and 179.
A shift from gA? to gB would occur in variants
11, 32, 69, 73, 84, 125, 132, 135, 136, 154, 163, and 171.
Variants 9, 16, 17, 20, 22, 38, 54, 65, 67, 68, 70, 76, 93, 113, 119, 140,
and 168 would change from a preference of none to gB.
And an upgrade from gB? to gB would be given to variants
18, 27, 74, 94, 111, 117, 126, and 148.
On the other hand a reevaluation from gA? to gA would be awarded
to variants 8, 37, 127, 129, and 174.
A preference of none with respect to variants 43, 82, 108, and 134
would shift to gA.
A preference of gB? would become gA only for variants 120, 153, and 159,
and no variants at all would change from gB to gA, if shorter readings
were for the moment automatically preferred.
This is clearly a substantial issue.

</div>
<div type=section><head> Other Sampling Approaches </>

<p>
Instead of representing each text type by four leading MSS,
one may consider using more or fewer representative MSS.
???.

</div>
<div type=section><head> Related Studies </>

<p>
Elliott (Elliott 1988) did a study in Acts of the internal evidence
supporting variant readings of the different text types,
discussing individual cases arranged topically, and found
that the correct text survives in different places in each
of the major text types, with none holding a monopoly.
He admits, however, that his subjective sampling method did not support making
a general assessment of the worthiness of each text type.

<p>
Kilpatrick is rumored to have performed a study roughly similar to this one,
which I have not been able to locate,
which however examined Byzantine readings taken from Sturz'es list
in (Sturz 1984) of papyrus-supported Byzantine readings unsupported
by Alexandrian or Western witnesses.  He also found a roughly equal
balance of internal evidence for and against the Byzantines.

<p>
Metzger (Metzger 1968), pp. 137-138, summarizes some work of
Bernhard Weiss which I have not yet been able to track down.
According to Metzger,
Weiss was an exegete who worked through the NT, considering
important textual variants, and selecting in each case
those readings which seemed to him to be justified by intrinsic probability,
adopting the variants which he regarded as most appropriate
to the author's style and theology.
No transcriptional considerations were examined, except possibly
that of synoptic harmonization.
After reconstructing the best text by these standards,
he assessed the degree to which some Greek manuscripts
conformed or failed to conform to his text,
and he judged Vaticanus to be the best witness.

<p>
Before undertaking this quite careful study of Luke, I did a
similar study of Acts 1-6 with less formality, which I never formally wrote up.
This was a comparison of the Hodges-Farstad Majority text against an
Alexandrian text reconstructed from the apparatus of NA26.
The rules defining each text were less clearly defined,
and there was no way to separate out the issue of age from
text type,
because essentially all the Byzantine manuscripts in Acts are rather late,
but, again, the balance of internal evidence seemed roughly equal on each side.

<p>
A future confirmatory study might be undertaken on the last chapters
of Matthew where Alexandrinus is extant, in order to check whether
Luke-Acts formed a special case.  The apparatus of Swanson [Swa]
would likely be sufficient to supply the readings.
The 6th or 7th century uncials available would likely replace Y in Matthew.
A similar study in the epistles would be difficult because the
earliest extant greek manuscripts of the Byzantine text type date
several centuries after the fragmentary 4th-6th century evidence
found in the Gothic and the patristic citations.

<p>
Even though Hort's concept of "distinctively Syrian" readings has some
logical problems, it might pay to classify the 179 variants examined here
as either distinctively Syrian vs. Neutral&plus;Western, or as Syrian&plus;Western
vs. Neutral, or as a borderline situation between these two.  This
classification would support responding directly to some of Hort's predictions.

</div>
</body>
<back> 
  <div type=bibliography>
    <head> Bibliography </>
    <listBibl>

<bibl n='Ala'>
<author>Aland, K, and Aland, B,</> <title>"The Text of the New Testament",</>
translated by <editor role=translator>Rhodes, E F,</> from the second edition,
<publisher>Eerdmans,</> <pubPlace>Grand Rapids,</> <date>1989</>.
</bibl>

<bibl n='NA26'>
Aland, K, et al, "Novum Testamentum Graece et Latine", 26th. edition,
Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft, Stuttgart, 1979.
</bibl>

<bibl n='IGNTP1'>
Ed: the American and British Committees of the IGNTP, "The Gospel
according to Luke", Part one, Chapters 1-12, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1984.
</bibl>
<bibl n='IGNTP2'>
Ed: the American and British Committees of the IGNTP, "The Gospel
according to Luke", Part two, Chapters 13-24, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1987.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Bau'>
Bauer, W, "A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other
Early Christian Literature", translated from the fifth edition
by Arndt, W F, and Gingrich, F W, U of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1979.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Bov'>
Bover, J, "Autenticidad de Lc 9:54-56",
Estudios Eclesiasticos 27 (1953) 347-349.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Bur'>
Burgon, J W, "Unholy Hands on the Bible, Volume I",
Sovereign Grace Trust Fund, Lafayette, 1990.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Cad'>
Cadbury, H J, "Four Features of Lukan Style",
pp. 87-102 in "Studies in Luke-Acts", ed. L E Keck and J L Martyn,
Abingdon Press, Nashville, 1966.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Col'>
Colwell, E C, "Method in evaluating scribal habits: a study of p45, p66, p75",
pp. 106-124 in "Studies in Methodology in Textual Criticism of the New Testament",
New Testament Tools and Studies vol. 9, Brill, Leiden, 1969.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Com'>
Comfort, P, "The Quest for the Original Text of the New Testament",
????.

<bibl n='Cor'>
Cortes, J B, "The Greek text of Luke 18:14a :
A contribution to the method of reasoned eclecticism",
CBQ 46 (1984) pp 255-273.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Ehr'>
Ehrman, B D, "The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture:
The Effect of Early Christological Controversies on
the Text of the New Testament",
Oxford U Press, New York, 1993.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Ell72'>
Elliott, J K, "Phrynicus' influence on the textual
tradition of the New Testament",
Zeitschrift f&uuml;r die Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft
and die Kunde der &auml;lteren Kirche 63 (1972) 133-138.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Ell88'>
Elliott, J K, "The Text of Acts in the Light of Two Recent Studies",
NTS 34 (1988) 250-258.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Fee79'>
Fee, G D, "A Critique of W. N. Pickering's, 'The Identity of the New Testament
Text' ", Westminster Theological Journal, 41:2 (Spring 1979), pp 397-423.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Fee95'>
Fee, G D, "The Majority text and the original text of the New Testament",
reprinted recently in Epp, E E and Fee, G D, "Studies in the theory and
method of New Testament textual criticism", pp. 183-208, Eerdmans, 1995.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Fit81'>
Fitzmyer, J A, "The Gospel according to Luke (I-IX)", vol. 1,
in the Anchor Bible, Doubleday, NY, 1981.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Fit85'>
Fitzmyer, J A, "The Gospel according to Luke (X-XXIX)", vol. 2,
in the Anchor Bible, Doubleday, NY, 1985.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Hoo'>
Hood, Peter, "Observations on early papyri of the Synoptic Gospels,
especially on the 'Scribal Habits'", Bib 7 (1990) pp. 240-247.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Kil'>
Kilpatrick, G D, "Atticism and the Text of the Greek New Testament",
Neutestamentliche Aufs&auml;tze, Festschrift f&uuml;r Prof. Josef Schmid.
ed. by J. Blinzler, O. Kuss, and F. Mussner.  Regensburg: Pustet, 1963,
pp. 125-137.
</bibl>

<bibl n='LSJM'>
Liddel, Scott, Jones, McKenzie, "Greek Lexicon",
Cambridge Press??.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Met68'>
Metzger, B M, "The Text of the New Testament:
Its Transmission, Corruption, and Restoration", second edition,
Oxford U Press, New York, 1968.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Met75'>
Metzger, B M, "A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament",
United Bible Societies, New York, 1975.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Rob'>
Robinson, M A, "...scribal habits...Apocalypse", ??
Ph.D. dissertation....
</bibl>

<bibl n='Ross'>
Ross, J M, "The Rejected Words in Luke 9:54-56",
Exp. Tim. 84 (1972-73) 85-88.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Roy81'>
Royce, J R, "Scribal Habits in early Greek New Testament Papyri",
ThD dissertation, Graduate Theological Union, 1981.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Roy95'>
Royce, J R, "Scribal tendencies in the transmission of the text of
the New Testament" collected in Ehrman, B D and Holmes, M W,
"The text of the New Testament in contemporary research", Eerdmans, 1995.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Stu'>
Sturz, H A, "The Byzantine Text-Type and New Testament Textual Criticism",
Thomas Nelson, Nashville, 1984.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Swa'>
ed. Swanson, R J, "New Testament Greek Manuscripts:  Variant Readings
arranged in Horizontal Lines against Codex Vaticanus:  Matthew",
William Carey International Univ. Press, Pasadena, 1995.
</bibl>

<bibl n='W-H'>
Westcott, B F, and Hort, F J A, "The New Testament
in the Original Greek: Introduction and Appendix by the editors",
Harper and Brothers, New York, 1882.
</bibl>

<bibl n='Wis'>
Wisse, F, "The Profile Method for the Classification and Evaluation
of Manuscript Evidence", Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, 1982.
</bibl>

    </listBibl>
  </div>
</back> 
</text> 
</tei.2> 
